                                                               Dutch Books for Language Models


                                                               Isaiah Andrews                             Suproteem Sarkar
                                                               MIT and NBER                              University of Chicago
                                                             iandrews@mit.edu                         suproteem@uchicago.edu
arXiv:2609.02797v1 [econ.GN] 2 Sep 2026




                                                                                           Abstract
                                                      People increasingly use language models to support life decisions. Many such
                                                      decisions involve a probabilistic forecast: How likely is a major life event, a natural
                                                      disaster, or an economic outcome? Users of language models may implicitly trust
                                                      that these forecasts fall out of a coherent world model. In this paper, we evaluate
                                                      the coherence of language model probabilistic forecasts through a procedure that
                                                      builds on a theorem due to de Finetti. We elicit forecasts from language models
                                                      across events generated from stock returns data. We then use linear programs to
                                                      compute the largest Dutch-book profit - the profit an arbitrageur could guarantee
                                                      by betting against model-generated probabilities - which we use as a measure of
                                                      incoherence. Our procedure does not require outcome labels, so we can evaluate
                                                      coherence even in settings where outcomes are not observed or have not yet
                                                      resolved. We find substantial evidence of incoherence in language model forecasts.
                                                      Such incoherence increases when there are richer logical relationships between
                                                      events, and irrelevant contextual details can increase incoherence by an order of
                                                      magnitude. We conclude by discussing how alternative training strategies may
                                                      improve probabilistic coherence.


                                          1    Introduction
                                          Language models are increasingly used for probabilistic forecasting, and the performance of model
                                          ensembles rivals that of groups of humans [Schoenegger et al., 2024, Halawi et al., 2024, Alur et al.,
                                          2025]. At the same time, model predictions are sometimes incoherent, for instance failing to respect
                                          that the probability of an event and its complement must sum to one [Paleka et al., 2025].
                                          A classic theorem due to de Finetti [1937, 1974] establishes that probabilistic forecasts for a finite
                                          collection of events are coherent (that is, consistent with some probability distribution) if and only
                                          if an arbitrageur facing odds based on those probabilities has no Dutch book, that is, no way of
                                          placing bets which yields a profit regardless of the outcome. This provides an immediate route to
                                          check the coherence of a group of forecasts: one may simply play the role of an arbitrageur aiming to
                                          maximize the worst-case profits, treating stated probabilities as prices. Zero profits indicate coherence.
                                          Importantly, this check requires no outcome labels, since it is based on the probabilistic forecasts
                                          (and their known logical structure) alone. Andrews [2026] proposes this use of de Finetti’s result in
                                          language model evaluation and training, while this paper explores the question empirically, importing
                                          no-arbitrage pricing as a label-free coherence measure.
                                          Our empirical evaluation of probabilistic coherence in language models uses stock market data. In
                                          particular, we ask models to predict the probability that future stock returns fall in a given return bin,
                                          based on recent return history and in some cases additional information. Considering multiple such
                                          bins, as well as their unions and complements, across days and across assets generates a collection of
                                          events whose logical structure is known by construction. We then score coherence for predictions on
                                          (a subset of) these events by the largest profit that an arbitrageur could guarantee by betting against
                                          the models’ stated probabilities. This choice of domain helps tie our prediction exercise to practice,
                                          since binary option contracts (i.e., contracts which pay off a fixed amount if some event occurs, and

                                          Preprint.
nothing otherwise), including contracts based on stock returns, are common in prediction markets.
Moreover, prediction market probabilities are routinely interpreted as probabilistic forecasts [Wolfers
and Zitzewitz, 2004, 2006, Snowberg et al., 2013, Diercks et al., 2026]. The model predictions we
study are not tradable, however, so the “profits” we consider are measures of the degree of incoherence
rather than financial returns.
Our evaluation covers 100 stock-days, 15 models, and a variety of elicitation arms detailed below,
with 365,100 total elicitations. Our main contributions are as follows:

       • We develop an evaluation of probabilistic coherence in language model forecasts. Our
         method is exhaustive with respect to a fixed event set, and does not require outcome labels.
       • We find that incoherence, as measured through arbitrage profit, is common and often
         sizable. We find larger variation in coherence than in accuracy.
       • We find that forecasts that involve rich logical relationships have higher incoherence,
         even for models that are more coherent on simpler forecasting tasks.
       • We show that coherence varies strongly with the elicitation protocol. Irrelevant contextual
         details can increase incoherence by an order of magnitude.

In addition, we discuss training strategies that may improve coherence in language model forecasts.
The closest work to ours is Paleka et al. [2025], who propose to check selected cross-forecast
consistency properties for model forecasts, and show that incoherent forecasts can be improved (on
average across events) regardless of the outcome. We offer a similarly arbitrage-based coherence
measure, but differ in that we focus on exhausting the implications of probabilistic coherence (and
thus use a global coherence measure) for a given set of forecasts. Like Paleka et al. [2025], however,
we find that across models coherence is positively correlated with accuracy. Incoherent probability
judgments are well documented in humans and, more recently, in models: Betz and Richardson
[2023] and Fluri et al. [2024] measure probabilistic consistency of language models and explore
methods to improve it, while other work finds incoherent probability judgments [Zhu and Griffiths,
2024] and proposes repairs for Dutch-book and related vulnerabilities [Chadwick et al., 2025, Matta
et al., 2026]. Our elicitation approach relates to work on eliciting model confidence [Kadavath et al.,
2022, Lin et al., 2022, Tian et al., 2023], improving logical agreement among assertions [Kassner
et al., 2021, Mitchell et al., 2022], as well as work measuring sensitivity to example order [Lu et al.,
2022], prompt format [Sclar et al., 2024], and query protocol [Lei and Cooper, 2026]. More broadly,
our results relate to a growing literature on world models [Li et al., 2023, Vafa et al., 2024, 2025].
Unlike calibration [Guo et al., 2017], proper scoring rules [Gneiting and Raftery, 2007], and recent
benchmarks that score model probabilities on prediction-market or platform questions [Nel, 2025,
Cheng et al., 2026, Karger et al., 2025], coherence requires no realized outcomes.

2   Coherence and Dutch Books
Consider a finite collection of events E1 , . . . , En whose logical relationships are known. The algebra
these events generate (the collection of all events expressible through complements, intersections, and
unions) partitions the possible outcomes into atoms ω1 , . . . , ωm . These atoms are the finest outcomes
that the events jointly distinguish. Let the incidence matrix M ∈ {0, 1}n×m record the mapping
of atoms to events, where Mij = 1 if atom ωj belongs to event Ei , and let p ∈ [0, 1]n denote the
probabilities a model states for the events.
Consider an arbitrageur placing bets at the model’s stated probabilities. A bet of stake bi on event
Ei costs bi pi and pays bi if the event occurs, so its net payoff on atom ωj is bi (Mij − pi ). Negative
stakes correspond to bets against the event. A Dutch book against p is a collection of bets whose net
payoff is strictly positive no matter which atom occurs, and our measure of incoherence is the profit
an arbitrageur can guarantee per unit of total stake,
                                                          n
                                                          X
                            ℓ∞ (p) = max        min             bi (Mij − pi ) .                      (1)
                                      ∥b∥1 ≤1 j=1,...,m
                                                          i=1
                        P
The constraint ∥b∥1 = i |bi | ≤ 1 caps the (notional) amount wagered, and ensures that the profit
is finite. Standard duality arguments, reviewed in Appendix A, show that our incoherence measure


                                                   2
                                                                  Example of Arbitrage Profit

                          (A) Elicited Forecasts                               (B) Model Outputs          (C) Arbitrage Portfolio
        outcome bin
                                                                                                                   ℓ∞ = 0.011

     (‐∞, ‐1)
                                                                                                                 arbitrage profit


                [‐1, 0)


                                    [1, ∞)
                           [0, 1)
                                             event (z = std. return)                                           sell < 0   buy > 0
 1                                           z < −1
 2                                           z<0
 3                                           z<1
 4                                           z ∈ [−1, 0)                                0.40                                  +0.33
 5                                           z ∈ [−1, 1)                                   0.82               −0.33
 6                                           z ≥ −1
 7                                           z ∈ [0, 1)                                0.38                                   +0.33
 8                                           z≥0
 9                                           z≥1
10                                           z < −1 or z ≥ 0
11                                           z < −1 or z ≥ 1
12                                           z < 0 or z ≥ 1
13                                           z < −1 or z ∈ [0, 1)
14                                           z ∈ [−1, 0) or z ≥ 1
                                                                         0.0            0.5        1.0   −1             0             1
                                                                                    Forecast pi               Stake bi (gross = 1)


Figure 1: An example of arbitrage profit. The figure shows, for a particularly incoherent draw, the
queried events (left), the model’s stated probabilities (center), and the corresponding portfolio (right).
The three binding events are highlighted. Any coherent forecast satisfies P (−1 ≤ z < 0) + P (0 ≤
z < 1) = P (−1 ≤ z < 1). In this case the model’s stated probabilities are 0.4000 and 0.3833 and
0.8167, respectively. Therefore, buying one third unit each of events 4 and 7 and selling one third unit
of event 5 yields profit 0.01113 on every atom. In the figure, numbers are rounded to two significant
digits.


equals minπ∈∆m−1 ∥M π − p∥∞ , the sup-norm distance from p to the set of coherent forecasts, for
∆m−1 the set of probability distributions over the atoms. We accordingly call ℓ∞ (p) the arbitrage
profit. From the dual form it is immediate that ℓ∞ (p) = 0 exactly when the stated probabilities
are coherent, meaning that p extends to some probability measure over the algebra, recovering the
characterization of de Finetti [1937, 1974]. Figure 1 works through an example.
We emphasize three properties of our coherence measure. First, coherence is a property of model
responses, which may or may not correspond to “true” model beliefs in a meaningful sense. Second,
coherence is not accuracy: a forecaster who assigns probability one to a single well-defined outcome
(e.g. all stock prices rise by precisely 150%) is coherent no matter what events we consider, so
while dogmatism may make for poor forecast accuracy, it is perfectly coherent. Third, our coherence
measure depends on the events queried, and ℓ∞ is weakly increasing as events are added to a set.


3      Data and Experimental Design

Sample. We build a stock-date sample of past, current, and future returns matched to current news
headlines. The returns data come from CRSP and headline data from Refinitiv. We draw the sample
as follows. First, we consider stocks s and anchor dates t in the CRSP daily stock file with t ranging
from August 15, 2025 to December 23, 2025. We choose this window as it falls after the August
5, 2025 release date of GPT-OSS-120B, which is the workhorse model for much of our analysis,
allowing us to limit lookahead bias from pretraining [Glasserman and Lin, 2024, Sarkar and Vafa,
2024]. We keep stock-date observations with at least 60 trading days of prior return history, at least
five subsequent trading days of return history, and for which a matched news headline in the Refinitiv
data was published before the NYSE trading day close on date t. We then draw 10,000 stock-days
uniformly without replacement. From this 10,000-observation sample, we sample 50 trading dates
uniformly at random and on each date uniformly draw two stocks. This sampling strategy yields 98
distinct stocks, two of which appear on two dates each. These design choices give us a consistent
sample to use across our extension experiments, including providing models with news headlines and
evaluating model outputs for two stocks on the same day.


                                                                                3
Models. We evaluate fifteen models, drawn from a range of open- and closed-weight families -
Appendix C lists providers and additional details. Prompts are identical across models, we use each
provider’s default reasoning settings, set temperature equal to one if the provider accepts the parameter
(again, see Appendix C for details), and set a 8,192 token completion limit. Early exploration on other
data suggested that GPT-OSS-120B was particularly coherent, so we have taken it as the workhorse
of our analysis, e.g., when exploring the extent to which coherence varies with the details of the
elicitation or the richness of the events queried. This model is particularly attractive as our workhorse
as it was released before our sample period, which reduces the potential for lookahead bias, and has
open weights, which allows for greater replicability compared to closed-weight models [cf. Chen
et al., 2024].

Event panels. For horizons h ∈ {1, . . . , 4}, we consider the events that the return from day t+d−1
to day t + d for d ∈ {1, . . . , h}, divided by the standard deviation of returns over the 60 trading days
preceding the anchor date t, falls in one of the four bins with edges at −1, 0 and 1. This coarsening
yields 4h possible outcomes at horizon h. At horizon one we consider all 14 events expressible
based on the four bins (excluding the empty and certain events). For longer horizons, we add the 14
non-trivial events for each day, as well as additional events spanning multiple days. Specifically, for
each pair of days we coarsen the bins into up versus down, tails versus center, and each bin versus the
rest, and within each coarsening elicit the probability of the four intersections across the two days.
Finally, for h ≥ 3, we include the up-versus-down patterns for each triple of days, and at h = 4, also
across all four days. By construction this yields nested event panels: every event in the horizon h
panel appears in the horizon h + 1 panel as well.

Elicitation. In all elicitations, we provide the model with each stock’s previous 60 daily returns,
normalized to have standard deviation one, as well as the standard deviation over those 60 days,
with real dates shown and the stock’s identity withheld except where otherwise noted. Our baseline
elicitation protocol asks about a single event in each query, with each query submitted to an indepen-
dent session and no access to other queries or their answers, and a fixed instruction identifying the
model as a forecaster. We use this one-query-at-a-time format to mimic deployments where different
questions arrive from users in sessions with no shared context.
Our baseline elicitations ask about the 14 horizon one events for a single stock. We also consider
elicitations that ask about two stocks at once, and others that consider longer horizons as described
above. We further consider several variants of our baseline elicitation, each changing one aspect at a
time: arms which add the stock’s bin frequencies over the 60 displayed days, or additional guidance
on a forecasting procedure to use; an identity arm which names the company and a headline arm
further adding the stock-day’s matched headline; grouped arms which ask about multiple events at
once, ranging from logically unrelated events to the full event panel; a red herring arm which varies
return-irrelevant aspects of the prompt, and averaging arms which average across multiple elicited
responses before assessing coherence.
For all analyses, except where noted otherwise, we run five passes for each stock-day prompt, compute
the LP solution for each pass separately, and use the average LP value across the five passes for
each stock-day prompt. We refer to this statistic as the arbitrage profit and use it as a measure of
incoherence. Appendix B provides additional details.

Inference. Except where noted otherwise, all confidence intervals are 95 percent percentile boot-
strap intervals, clustered on date, based on 20,000 replicates. Clustering on date captures the
randomness arising from our random sampling of dates and, conservatively, the sampling of stocks
within each date.

4     Results
4.1   Language Model Forecasts Are Incoherent

We find evidence of incoherence in language model forecasts. We first report results from the baseline
elicitation. For each of the 100 stock-days, we elicited forecasts from GPT-OSS-120B for each of
the 14 questions over horizon h = 1. The mean profit was 0.002067 per unit of gross stake (95%
CI [0.001471, 0.002737]). We observed a profit of at least 0.1 percent per unit stake in 48 of 100


                                                    4
