                                                            Separating quantum circuits from classical LLMs
                                                    Srinivasan Arunachalam∗                 Arkopal Dutt∗              Hari Krovi∗            Rik Sengupta∗


                                                                                                   Abstract
                                                        Modern large language models – transformers and diffusion language models – are built
                                                    around two canonical algorithmic tasks: prediction and generation. We prove unconditional
                                                    separations between low-depth quantum computation and the corresponding bounded-resource
                                                    classical language-model architectures in both regimes. Concretely, we exhibit the following:
                                                      1. Distributional separation. We give a distribution that is sampleable by QNC0 circuits
                                                         (i.e., a family of constant-depth quantum circuits consisting of bounded fan-in gates) that
arXiv:2608.03962v1 [quant-ph] 4 Aug 2026




                                                         no constant-round diffusion language model (DLM) with shallow scheduling and denoising
                                                         can sample within constant distance, even when allowed sublinear chain-of-thought and
                                                         output-token revision/remasking events, the very features modern DLMs rely on.
                                                      2. Functional separation. We exhibit a function computable in ∧ ◦ QNC0 [log log n] (i.e., a
                                                         family of O(log log n)-depth QNC0 circuits, where n is the input length, followed by a single
                                                         classical AND gate) such that any constant-depth decoder-only transformer computing the
                                                         function must be large: it would have to have width nΩ(1) .
                                                    Together, our work initiates the study of quantum advantage in the era of large language models.


                                           Contents
                                           1 Introduction                                                                                                              2
                                             1.1 Main results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    3
                                             1.2 Functional separation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       3
                                             1.3 Distributional separation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     6
                                             1.4 Outlook and further directions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       11

                                           2 Preliminaries and Background                                                                                           12
                                             2.1 Circuits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
                                             2.2 Transformer models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
                                             2.3 Diffusion models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18

                                           3 Functional separation: quantum versus transformer models                                                             22
                                             3.1 Motivation for our candidate problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
                                             3.2 Final candidate function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
                                             3.3 Quantum upper bound . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
                                             3.4 Classical lower bound . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
                                             3.5 Obstructions in further improvement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38

                                           4 Distributional separation: quantum circuits versus DLMs                                                               39
                                             4.1 Main result . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
                                             4.2 Quantum upper bound . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
                                             4.3 Lower bound: important lemmas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
                                             4.4 Proof of the classical lower bound . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51



                                              ∗
                                                  IBM Research. srinivasan.arunachalam@ibm.com, arkopal@ibm.com, hari.krovi@ibm.com, rik@ibm.com.


                                                                                                        1
1    Introduction
A central task in quantum computing is finding problems solvable by quantum computers but not
solvable by their classical counterparts. At its strongest, this asks for an unconditional complexity-
theoretic separation between quantum and classical computing. In the oracular model, exponential
separations are well-known, but in the non-oracular model such separations are far beyond current
techniques for general polynomial-time computation. More recently, a fruitful line of work has
focused on restricted models and asking if one can show unconditional separations between quantum
and classical computation.
    One such direction that has received a lot of traction recently is understanding the power of
shallow circuits, i.e., constant-depth quantum circuits in contrast to their classical counterparts.
Shallow quantum circuits are well motivated from a practical point of view, since they are potentially
implementable on near-term fault-tolerant quantum computers. Understanding the power of these
circuits was spurred by the groundbreaking work of Bravyi, Gosset, and König [BGK18], who gave
an unconditional relational separation between quantum and classical shallow circuits. Concretely,
they considered the class of classical circuits of polynomial size, constant depth, unbounded fan-out,
and bounded fan-in gates (which is often referred to as NC0 ) and the class of quantum circuits of
polynomial size and constant depth with single- or two-qubit gates (which is referred to as quantum
NC0 , denoted QNC0 ). In [BGK18], they exhibited a relational problem1 solvable by a QNC0 circuit
but not by any NC0 circuit. Subsequent works strengthened this result in several directions, showing
that the classical lower bound holds in the average case [CSV21, LG19], that the quantum upper
bound is robust to noise [BGKT20], that stronger separations can be obtained between QNC0 vs
AC0 [BWKST19], QNC0 vs GC0 [GK24] (we will formally define these classes later), as well as in
interactive settings [GS20] and sampling separations between QNC0 and classical classes [BWP26,
GKM+ 26]. These results suggest that, in general, shallow quantum circuits can generate and utilize
correlations that are inaccessible to several “standard” shallow classical circuit classes.
     A natural next question is whether such separations can be shown for more “contemporary”
classical computational models. In this direction, given the remarkable success of large language
models (LLMs) in practice, a rapidly growing body of work has sought to understand the expressive
power and computational limitations of various models of LLMs. In this regime, transformer mod-
els [VSP+ 17] have been the dominant architecture for prediction-based language modeling, while
diffusion language models [SDWMG15, HJA20] (DLMs) have provided an alternative paradigm for
content generation. Although these models can seem superficially different from the traditional
circuit complexity classes studied in complexity theory (such as NC0 , AC0 , and TC0 ), their the-
oretical abstractions often retain a key shallow-classical feature: every layer of token updates is
generated by bounded-depth classical computation with limited bandwidth. This suggests a new
form of quantum-classical comparison: rather than only asking whether one can separate QNC0
from the “theoretically-motivated” circuit classes NC0 , AC0 , or GC0 , we can now also ask whether
shallow quantum circuits can solve computational or sampling tasks that are hard for transformers
or DLMs, resulting in a new realm of separation results. Given the recent surge of interest in
understanding large language models and the role of quantum computing in machine learning, a
particularly timely question is the following:
           Is there a task solvable by shallow quantum circuits but not by classical LLMs?
   1
     Unlike a functional problem which has a unique output for every input, a relational problem can have several
outputs for an input; the goal is to produce one such valid output for a given input.




                                                       2
1.1     Main results
We show two results that separate quantum shallow circuits from transformers and DLMs for
functional and distributional tasks respectively. In particular, we exhibit the following:
   1. a function that is computable by a O(log log n)-depth QNC0 circuit followed by a single
      classical AND gate, but hard to compute by a shallow-depth transformer unless it is “large”;2
   2. a distribution that is sampleable in QNC0 , but hard to approximately sample from a DLM
      which uses GC0 denoisers,3 has sublinear chain-of-thought/workspace, and a sublinear number
      of output-token revision/remasking events (which are the features modern DLMs rely on).
A key distinction from earlier shallow-circuit separations is that our lower bounds are not only
against classical circuit classes such as NC0 , AC0 , GC0 , but against basic transformer and diffusion
language models used in recent theoretical studies of modern language models [CPW25, JHC26]
to understand the strengths and weaknesses of these models. Although our tasks are deliberately
complexity-theoretic, the separating models are among the closest formal proxies currently available
for the prediction and generation mechanisms used in practice. To formulate our main results
formally, we need a high-level definition of transformers and DLMs, which we provide in the next
sections (Sections 1.2 and 1.3). For each of these models, we give an overview of some prior classical
works in the related area, which serve as a starting point for our results; after that, we state our
main theorem for that model, and give a detailed proof sketch of the separation in question.

1.2     Functional separation
1.2.1    Transformer models (a high level overview)
In this section, we give a high-level overview of transformers, sufficient to understand the proof
overview that follows subsequently. In Section 2.2 we give a detailed overview of the model.
     Transformers form the backbone of most modern LLMs. The core transformer architecture
is specified by a number of parameters: the input length n (the “context size”), the number L
of layers (the “depth”), the number H of attention heads, the embedding dimension d, and a
precision parameter p. A transformer can be viewed as a sequence of length-preserving functions
on d-dimensional real vectors across a sequence of layers, once the input text has been embedded
into one such sequence. The transition between every pair of adjacent layers in the transformer
architecture is determined by parameterized query, key, and value vectors. At a high level, the
so-called attention mechanism takes as input a vector x ∈ Rn , and then takes a position-wise
weighted average of value vectors (where the weights are a function of the key and query vectors),
followed by a position-wise piecewise affine transformation. In this work, we exclusively consider
decoder-only transformers, where each position attends only to positions preceding it, reflecting the
causal structure of autoregressive generation. We emphasize that almost every prominent modern
LLM, such as GPT [RWC+ 19], Claude [ENO+ 21], Gemini [G+ 24] and LlaMa [Met24], use variants
of the decoder-only transformer architecture, due to their superiority in next-token prediction.
    From the perspective of complexity, the key resource for transformers is not merely the total
number of parameters, but the total amount of information communicated through the attention
mechanism at each layer. Following recent work, this notion of “useful” information transmitted
through the layers is captured by the so-called width Hdp, which is simply the product of the number
   2
     We formally define the notion of small and large transformers in Section 3.
   3
     The circuit class GC0 [k] consists of unbounded fan-in and fanout AND, OR, NOT gates along with the G[k] gate,
which on input x ∈ {0, 1}n , can compute an arbitrary function of x if |x|≤ k and evaluates to 0 otherwise. Throughout
this work, we will restrict to k ≤ O(log n).


                                                          3
of heads, the embedding dimension, and the precision used to represent each numeric coordinate.
Following the convention of [CPW25, SHT23] we say a transformer is small if Hdp = no(1) , and large
otherwise. In particular, a computational task can be thought of as requiring large width if every
constant-depth decoder-only transformer solving the problem requires large internal communication
in between the layers. We note that the assumption of constant depth is reasonable in practice.

1.2.2     Prior works and context
We now provide some context and prior works in understanding the complexity of transformers,
which will set up the main motivation for our results.
  (i) There have been several recent complexity theoretic works characterizing the power of trans-
      former models in terms of circuits [CC22, CCP23, YCA24, LLZM24]. Depending on the
      assumptions on the parameters of the transformers in question (i.e., H, d, p defined earlier),
      their expressive power can be shown to lie somewhere roughly between AC0 (e.g., for constant-
      precision transformers using unique hard attention) and TC0 (log-precision transformers using
      softmax attention). Hence, it is conceivable that the results in [BWKST19, GK24] imply that
      QNC0 can solve (relational) tasks that the small class of constant-precision transformers can-
      not solve.4
 (ii) Chen, Peng, and Wu [CPW25] were the first to show unconditional limitations of decoder-
      only transformer models (in the regime of non-constant precision, i.e., in the TC0 regime).
      Although their main candidate problem certifying hardness is not quite phrased in these
      terms, it can actually be viewed as a variant of the well-known index function. Their lower
      bound was obtained via a reduction to a novel communication complexity model.
(iii) Finally, a recent result of Grier et al. [GMW26] shows how to compute arbitrary TC0 functions
      in QAC0 , when the quantum circuit is provided with O(n2 ) copies of the input (where n is
      the length of the input),5 and further shows that computing the index function essentially
      requires these many copies.
The starting point for our work is the observation that we can avoid the O(n2 ) copies for a certain
class of problems which are also hard to compute by transformers (which computationally form a
subclass of TC0 ). In particular, we generalize the candidate function of [CPW25], and show that
this generalized function requires large width for constant-depth transformers computing it, but is
computable by the “simplest” non-trivial class ∧ ◦ QNC0 [log log n], i.e., an O(log log n)-depth QNC0
circuit followed by a single classical AND gate.6

1.2.3     Proof sketch of the functional separation
Why not a relational separation? We first explain why the well-known relational separations
used in [BGK18, BWKST19, GK24] do not imply separations between QNC0 and transformers of
the form that we want. To the best of our knowledge, almost all known existing techniques for
proving lower bounds on transformer width are primarily via proving communication complexity
   4
     We believe making this rigorous might be fruitful and leave it for future work.
   5
     Note that in classical complexity we often assume that the bits and gates have fanout, i.e., x1 , . . . , xn can be fed
to several gates, and so we can get polynomially many copies of the bits x1 , . . . , xn for free. However, quantum gates
do not have fanout, hence this is not a free operation for quantum circuits. Hence, one needs to account for “copying”
the input x and using t copies of the input increases the depth of the circuit by O(log t); so, creating poly(n) many
copies of the input adds O(log n) depth to the quantum circuit.
   6
     We call this the simplest class here since we show in addition that, if a function is exactly computed by ∧ ◦
QNC0 [log log n], then this function is actually computable by AC0 .


                                                             4
lower bounds [SHT23, PNP24, CPW25]. In this communication model, the relevant resource is
not the total number of bits of communication, but rather the per-player bandwidth, which is
typically measured proportional to the size of that player’s input. This creates a basic obstacle
for relational problems: the player’s output needs to be similar to the input (in order to have a
well-formed problem), and if each player is allowed bandwidth proportional to their input length,
then enough information can be communicated to solve the corresponding relational communication
task in a straightforward way. Thus, the bandwidth regime in which we can hope for a nontrivial
lower bound essentially disappears. In contrast, for functional problems, there are meaningful
intermediate bandwidth regimes: the output is a single fixed bit, so it makes sense to ask for a
bound on the amount of local information that must be transmitted in order to compute this target
bit. This is the reason we focus on a functional separation instead of a relational one.

Our candidate and lower bound. In light of the above discussion, we turn towards functional
problems, and in particular to the one considered by [CPW25], essentially a variant of the iterated
index function. Before discussing the iterated version, we first define the index function: on input
(i, x) ∈ [n] × {0, 1}n , the goal is to output xi . It is a well-known fact that the index function
can be computed in AC0 ; our goal was to express this circuit in terms of quantum gates, and in
particular through weak QAC0 circuits, which are the same as QNC0 except that we also allow
many-qubit gates (potentially acting on n qubits) on top of the usual one- and two-qubit gates.
There have been several recent works aimed at understanding the power of multi-qubit gates in
computing well-known Boolean functions [GHMP02, Ros21, VH25, FGPT25, GGJ26a, GGJ26b,
JTVW26, ADOY25, BEG26, NPVY24]; however, a common concern acknowledged in these works
is that it is undesirable to allow multi-qubit gates in quantum circuits, since they require coherent
interaction between arbitrary qubits, which is incompatible with locality and noise constraints in
physical architectures of current quantum devices. At this point, the following sequence of results
yields our separation:
  1. Index with copies. We first observe that the index function can be computed in QAC0
     assuming we have copies of the input. This is undesirable for two reasons: (i) we require
     copies and (ii) QAC0 circuits can be trivially simulated by QNC0 circuits of depth O(log n).
     At this point, we observe that one can overcome this trivial simulation as follows. We observe
     that the index function can be written as a QNC0 [log log n] circuit followed by a (large) AND
     gate at the end, however we still need copies of the input i in order to compute xi .
  2. Generalizing to iterated index, still with copies. Next, consider the iterated index
     function (as defined by Chen et al. [CPW25]) as follows:

                      IterInx : [m] × [N1 ]m × [N2 ]log N1 × · · · × [Nℓ ]log(Nℓ−1 ) → [Nℓ ],

     defined as

                           IterInx(i, x1 , . . . , xℓ ) = xℓ (xℓ−1 (xℓ−2 (· · · x1 (i)) · · ·)),   (1)

     for a pre-defined choice of parameters m, N1 , N2 , . . . , Nℓ−1 . In other words, we iteratively
     compute index on (i, x), look at xi ∈ [N1 ], then evaluate x2 on x1 (where we view x1 as
     a (log N1 )-bit string) and repeat this iteratively for ℓ many functions. Using the previous
     bullet point wherein one can compute index using copies, we show that one can actually even
     compute IterInx also in ∧ ◦ QNC0 [log log n] given copies of the input.
  3. Removing the multiple copies. The next natural step is to remove the assumption of
     many copies of the input being given. Using a standard trick also used in [GMW26], we first

                                                        5
        define the multi-index function as:

                                 MultInx : (i1 , . . . , iN , x) = xi · [i1 = · · · = iN ],           (2)

        which is now a total function. Note that by definition, if i1 = · · · = iN , then we effectively
        have access to copies of the input. However, the issue is that one needs to check the condition
        [i1 = · · · = iN ]. For this, we show that this indicator can be checked in ∧ ◦ QNC0 [log log n]
        as well. Furthermore, the same circuit used for checking the index can in fact also compute
        xi without increasing the complexity (our construction is subtle in that we ensure that the
        eventual circuit is not in ∧ ◦ ∨ ◦ QNC0 [log log n], but just a single AND gate at the end of the
        QNC0 [log log n] circuit).
  4. Generalizing to a hard problem for transformers. Now that we have a total function
     MultInx, the goal is to prove a lower bound against transformers. As we observed earlier, this
     problem is a priori easy for decoder-only transformers. To make it hard for the transformer
     model, we define our final candidate function to be the iterated multi-index function, denoted
     IterMultInx (putting together the functional computation Eq. (1) along with the predicate of
     Eq. (2)). Here, we have copies of truth tables {x1i , . . . , xℓi }i∈[t] (the t = 1 case is precisely
     the IterInx function) and with these copies of the truth table and index position, we show
     that IterMultInx can be computed in our desired quantum circuit class. A description of this
     final candidate is quite dense and technical, and so we refer the reader to Section 3.2.2 for
     the details.
  5. Putting everything together. The main challenge in putting together everything is keep-
     ing track of several parameters which need to be carefully chosen to witness our separation.
     Furthermore, the current outline is simplified slightly for ease of readability, but the eventual
     IterMultInx candidate is actually chosen with a slightly more contrived base index function
     which is also defined over a larger alphabet. With these technicalities in place, we concretely
     show that (i) the IterMultInx can be computed still in ∧ ◦ QNC0 [log log n]; (ii) the IterMultInx
     problem can be reduced to the IterInx problem, and the hardness for transformers can be
     therefore imported via the lower bound by Chen et al. [CPW25]. We note here that our lower
     bound is polynomially weaker than the one in [CPW25], since our problem is more general.
Finally, we remark that our separation above is essentially tight. In particular, we show that for
deterministic protocols, any function f that is computed by a ∧ ◦ QNC0 [log log n] circuit whose
depth is at most log log n (i.e., when the implicit constant in the O(log log n) depth is at most
1) can also be computed in AC0 , a circuit class that essentially corresponds to transformers with
constant precision (which is a strong assumption when it comes to transformer computations).
Since our goal is to prove lower bounds against non-constant precision transformers, our quantum
upper bound of ∧ ◦ QNC0 [log log n] (where the implicit constant in the O(log log n) depth is strictly
greater than 1) allows us to obtain a function that is in QNC0 but not computable by transformers
unless their width is large, i.e., Hdp = nΩ(1) .

1.3     Distributional separation
1.3.1     Diffusion models (a high level overview)
In this section, we give a high-level overview of DLMs, sufficient to understand the proof overview
that follows. As with transformers in Section 1.2, we first give a detailed overview of the model.
   Diffusion language models (DLMs) are a central generative paradigm for tasks such as
image and text generation. In this work, we will exclusively consider discrete diffusion models.

                                                         6
DLMs are organized differently from transformers, and are tailor-made to generate samples from
distributions. At a high level, DLMs generate samples by training models via the following process:
they introduce random noise to training data, and then train the model to systematically remove
the noise, so that the eventual model can generate new noiseless samples from the distribution.
More formally, instead of generating tokens strictly from left to right (as in transformers), a DLM
starts with the so-called masked sequence {mask}⋆ (which one can think of as maximally random)
and iteratively reveals/unmasks tokens to produce elements from the alphabet Σ (for simplicity
in this paper we let Σ = {0, 1}). So, at any point in the process, the DLM maintains a partially
revealed sequence whose coordinates are of the form Σ∪{mask}, where Σ is the fixed token alphabet
and mask is an auxiliary token. The sequence contains input coordinates and output coordinates,
together with possible auxiliary workspace or chain-of-thought (CoT) coordinates. The computation
itself begins with several masked coordinates, and proceeds through a number of denoising rounds
which consists of two phases: In the first phase, a scheduler decides on the set of currently masked
coordinates to be revealed, a decision that can adaptively depend on all the (non-mask) tokens
generated so far, including workspace tokens; and in the second phase, a denoiser circuit is applied
to each newly revealed coordinate, and a value is sampled.
     The defining structural feature of a standard DLM is within-round conditional independence.
Once the current partially generated sequence is fixed, the coordinates updated in that round are
sampled independently (but potentially dependent on the sequence at the beginning of the round),
using the corresponding coordinate-wise denoising marginals. Thus, after conditioning on the visible
transcript and the current workspace/CoT coordinates, a single denoising step induces a product
distribution over the coordinates it updates. Global correlations can still arise, but only through
the iterative interaction of scheduling, workspace, and future denoising rounds. This makes DLMs
powerful enough to build correlations adaptively, while still imposing a strong structural constraint
on what can be generated in one round.

1.3.2   Prior works and context
The starting point for our result is the work by Jiang, Haghtalab, and Chen [JHC26], which studies
DLMs as parallel samplers and analyzes the strengths and weakness of revision/remasking/chain-
of-thought in DLM models. In particular, there is one striking feature in their work: they consider
the distribution:
                             UB⊕ = unif{x ∈ {0, 1}B : |x|≡ 0 (mod 2)}.
They show that standard DLMs, without remasking or revision, cannot sample from this distribution
in O(1) steps when the predictor and scheduler are implemented by AC0 circuits. However, their
work cannot handle the scenario where the DLMs are augmented with a (bounded) number of
chain-of-thought tokens, and a (bounded) number of token revision/remasking events. Note that
both of these are features that modern DLMs crucially rely on. Although incomparable, the best
known distribution sampling quantum-classical separation we know of is due to Bene Watts and
Parham [BWP26] separating QNC0 from NC0 ; so it is natural to try and prove sampling lower
bounds using the candidate problem from [JHC26] against DLMs with AC0 denoisers. Furthermore,
several quantum/classical circuit separations [BGK18, BWKST19, BWP26] are in essence based
on the observation that one can sample parity-based relations and distributions in QNC0 . With
this in mind, our main contributions are as follows:
  (i) we generalize the candidate problem of [JHC26] and define a block-parity function, which still
      admits an efficient QNC0 protocol, but is provably hard for DLMs;
 (ii) using the generalized candidate, we are able to prove lower bounds even when we allow

                                                 7
         revision/remasking and chain-of-thought (with the caveat that we only allow at most sublinear
         number of tokens for these augmented features);
(iii) our lower bounds allow GC0 denoisers 7 , which are significantly stronger than AC0 denoisers;
(iv) we show hardness even to approximately sample from the newly constructed distribution.
     Indeed, along the way, we show several structural properties of DLMs that we hope might be
     of independent interest.
The main technical contribution of our work is the classical lower bound, which combines several
ideas from theoretical computer science. First, we use a direct-product style amplification to turn
many local parity constraints into a global obstruction. Second, we view a DLM execution as
a query-like process whose visible behavior, after hiding the workspace/CoT coordinates, can be
expressed as a convex combination of simple decision-tree-like distributions. Finally, we prove that
block-parity functions cannot be approximated by such small convex combinations. We make this
candidate problem and proof structure clear in the next section.

1.3.3      Proof sketch of the distributional separation
We now give a proof sketch of our DLM lower bound. The task that we consider here is to sample
from the distribution:
                         M
                         O
                Dblk =         UB⊕ = {(x1 , . . . , xM ) : xi ∈ {0, 1}B , |xi |≡ 0   (mod 2) for all i}
                         b=1
within total variation distance η for some fixed constant η > 0. The quantum algorithm to sample
from this is easy, and the main ideas have appeared before [BGK18, BWKST19, GK24]. We now
sketch the classical lower bound. Assume towards a contradiction that there exists a constant-
round standard DLM which samples from Dblk , with workspace length s, fully adaptive scheduling,
bounded revision/remasking, and polynomial-size constant depth GC0 [log n] scheduling and denois-
ing circuits.
    For each block b ∈ [M ], define its completion round to be the first round after which all B output
coordinates in that block have been generated. Let rb be the number of previously ungenerated
coordinates of block b that are generated in this round. Each block is completed in one of two ways.
       • rb ≥ 2, i.e., the DLM completes the block by unmasking many fresh coordinates at once;
       • rb = 1, i.e., the DLM completes the block by generating a single final coordinate, with the
         remaining B − 1 coordinates having already been fixed in previous rounds.
     The proof is a win–win argument over these two completion modes. Suppose first that many
blocks are completed with rb ≥ 2. For such a block, conditioned on the coordinates revealed earlier
in the block, the rb fresh coordinates are not freely distributed: under the target distribution, they
must satisfy one affine parity constraint. Thus a round that completes many such blocks must
simultaneously realize many independent within-block parity constraints. We prove a structural
theorem below showing that this is impossible for the conditional laws produced by a bounded-
workspace DLM. Hence, it follows that only few blocks can be completed in the multi-bit way and
for most blocks, we must have rb = 1. But then the DLM is forced into a “last-bit prediction”
regime: when it completes such a block, the final coordinate has to be the parity of the previous
B − 1 coordinates. This can be used to show that a shallow AC0 or GC0 circuit predicts parity with
constant bias, contradicting the usual parity lower bound of Hastad [Hås14] or Kumar [Kum23].
   7
    We do not define the class GC0 here and refer the reader to Section 2.1; we simply note that it is a classical
circuit complexity class that is strictly more powerful than AC0 .


                                                            8
 Formally, the argument proceeds in four main steps.
1. Mixtures of product distributions induced by DLMs. Fix a round t, and condition
   on the revealed output history τout , i.e., the revealed output coordinates for the final sample
   together with their values, the scheduling history up to round t, and the previously generated
   workspace/chain-of-thought tokens. Let w denote the revealed current workspace so far. Now,
   using the independence properties of DLMs, we have that the output distribution of the t-th
   round conditioned on τout and w is given by:

                          P (output of the t-th round | τout , w) = Qτout ,w ,

   where Qτout ,w is a product distribution over the coordinates revealed in round t. Hence,
   averaging over the possible current workspaces gives:
                                                           X
                    P (output of the t-th round | τout ) =   Pr[w | τout ] · Qτout ,w .  (3)
                                                                  w

   Since the token alphabet has constant size, the current workspace contains at most s tokens,
   and so there are at most 2O(s) possible values of w. Consequently, conditioned on any visible
   transcript, a denoising round induces only a small latent mixture of product distributions.
2. Multi-bit block completions. Now, fix a transcript branch and consider a block b com-
   pleted in some round with rb ≥ 2. Under the target distribution UB⊕ , the full block satisfies
   LB
      i=1 xb,i = 0. Once some coordinates of the block have already been revealed, the remaining
   unrevealed coordinates are still uniform subject only to the residual parity constraint deter-
   mined by the revealed prefix. Therefore, if the DLM completes the block by generating rb
   fresh coordinates simultaneously, the correct conditional law for these fresh coordinates is:
                                          (                         )
                                                          M
                             Urabb := unif x ∈ {0, 1}rb :    xi = ab ,
                                                                  i

   where ab depends on the previously revealed coordinates and the parity of their respective
   coordinates. Importantly, these distributions are not products over coordinates: the fresh co-
   ordinates inside the block must jointly satisfy a parity condition. Since Dblk is product across
   blocks, if many blocks are completed simultaneously, then the target conditional law becomes:
                                                  O
                                            V =       Urabb ,                                   (4)
                                                     b

   namely, a product across blocks of internally parity-constrained factors.
3. Inapproximability of Eq. (4). Now, our main structural result is that a distribution of the
   form given in Eq. (4) cannot be approximated by a small mixture of coordinate-wise product
   distributions. Quantitatively, if Eq. (3), written abstractly as:
                                                    K
                                                    X
                                            P =           λh Qh
                                                    h=1

   is a mixture of product distributions satisfying TV(P, V ) ≤ η, then we necessarily have:
                                                             !
                                                  X
                                     log K ≥ Ω       (rb − 1) .
                                                      b


                                                9
  Intuitively, each block completed with rb ≥ 2 contributes an independent intra-block parity
  constraint: the rb fresh coordinates must lie in an affine parity coset, i.e., satisfy ⊕i xi = ab ,
  rather than in a product distribution. A small latent mixture cannot realize many such
  constraints simultaneously. Quantitatively, if a round completes a collection of blocks with
  completion   sizes {rb }, then approximating the corresponding conditional law requires at least
   Ω( b (rb −1))
      P
  2              product components. On the other hand, after conditioning on the visible tran-
  script, the only hidden information is the workspace/CoT     coordinates, which gives at most
          O(s)
                                                       P
  K =2         mixture components. Hence, we have b (rb − 1) = O(s) in any typical denois-
  ing round. In particular, since every block with rb ≥ 2 contributes at least 1 to this sum,
  only O(s) blocks can be completed by simultaneous multi-bit generation over all (constantly
  many) rounds. Therefore, when s = o(M ), almost every block must fall in the category where
  rb = 1. Hence, we have reduced the task of DLM approximating Dblk to the task of predicting
  a parity bit, which will be the basis for our lower bound.
4. Reduction of final-bit completion to parity prediction. Suppose now that a block
   satisfies rb = 1. At its completion round, the DLM has already generated B − 1 coordinates
   and must generate the last one. Under UB⊕ , this last coordinate is forced:
                                                 M
                                          Xb,j =     Xb,i .
                                                    i̸=j

  Thus, a successful DLM must predict a parity bit. Technically, if the previous B − 1 bits
  generated by the DLM were uniformly random, then we are done since we can use known
  lower bounds of GC0 , AC0 computing parity. However, the first B − 1 bits were generated by
  the DLM itself, while the parity lower bound is for uniform external inputs. This is the most
  subtle part of the proof, and showing this requires us to account for the entropy of various
  blocks along the DLM process and show that there exists at least one block among the M
  blocks in which the pre-completion B − 1 bits have large entropy. In this block b⋆ , we can use
  the probabilistic method to show that the pre-completion bits are already close to uniform,
  which means that we can replace these bits by a set of independent uniform bits, This changes
  the execution distribution by only o(1) in total variation, while leaving the final completion
  round unchanged. After this replacement, the final generated bit predicts the parity of a
  uniform B-bit input with constant advantage. Since the planted execution can be simulated
  by a shallow GC0 [log n] circuit, we obtain a shallow circuit that computes parity on B − 1 bits
  with constant advantage, contradicting the known parity lower bounds for GC0 [log n] circuits
  [Kum23, GK24].
5. Handling Remasking/Revision. Finally, we extend the argument to bounded remask-
   ing/revision. We observe that this case requires a small modification of the entropy argu-
   ments. We cannot unfortunately simply restrict our attention to untouched blocks, since the
   set of touched blocks may be correlated with the generated values. Instead, we account for
   the entropy argument by adjusting the probability that it is revised after completion. Since
   there are at most R revision/remasking events, this adds only an o(M ) correction for our pa-
   rameters. In fact, the same win-win and planting argument as before goes through now. Each
   output-token remasking/revision event touches exactly one coordinate, and hence belongs to
   one block. Therefore, at most R distinct blocks can be touched by all such events. On the re-
   maining blocks, the execution is equivalent to one without output-token remasking/revision,
   and the previous argument applies. Restricting to the untouched blocks eliminates revision
   entirely, and the previous argument applies verbatim. Thus the lower bound survives as long
   as s + R = o(M ), which indeed motivates our main choice of parameters.

                                               10
1.4    Outlook and further directions
We see this work as initiating the task of separating quantum computation and classical LLMs.
Naturally, there are several questions arising from this work that are worth further investigating.
We hope that this serves as a launching pad for substantial future work from the community.
   1. Strengthening the separations. Is there a candidate problem for which we can also
      show DLM-hardness, even in the presence of linear chain-of-thought, and remasking and/or
      revision? In the case of transformers, we provide one reason why a more typical relational
      separation (where the input and output length are the same) seems essentially impossible
      to obtain, but this does not preclude more contrived search-based or relational separations
      between QNC0 and decoder-only transformers. Finally, since transformers (without chain-of-
      thought) are known to be inside TC0 , it is conceivable that one can obtain a width-Ω(n) lower
      bound without that implying a complexity-theoretic breakthrough.
   2. Randomized separation. This work is only concerned with deterministic functions. If we
      move to randomized problems (where the output needs to be correct with probability ≥ 2/3,
      say), can we also show separations, between, e.g., ∧ ◦ QNC0 and transformers?
   3. Quantum-augmented DLMs. In the model we consider here, recall that new bits are gen-
      erated using AC0 or GC0 denoisers. What if we used quantum circuits to generate new bits?
      Could such quantum-augmented DLMs be more powerful than using DLMs with classical-
      circuit based denoisers? More generally, is there a deeper connection between quantum dy-
      namics and DLMs?8
   4. Copy complexity of transformers. As mentioned earlier, a recent work of Grier et
      al. [GMW26] shows how to compute TC0 functions using QAC0 , with the caveat that one
      needs O(n2 ) copies of the input (assumed to be on n bits). Since transformers can be shown
      to roughly interpolate between AC0 and TC0 (depending on the precision parameter and the
      type of attention used), it is not inconceivable that computing these functions would require
      fewer copies for the QAC0 circuit. Could this be formalized?
   5. Architecture-independent separations. Our functional and distributional separations
      rely on different structural limitations of transformers and diffusion language models. Is there
      a single task solvable by shallow quantum circuits for which every bounded-resource classical
      language model—whether autoregressive, diffusion-based, or a hybrid of the two—must incur
      a polynomial cost in at least one of width, chain-of-thought/workspace, sequential generation
      rounds, or token revision?

Final remarks. Finally, we make a couple of important remarks on our results to contextualize
our work fairly. The separations that we exhibit here are entirely theoretical. Our motivation is to
understand how quantum algorithms could be better than classical LLMs at certain ad hoc tasks
that are specifically designed to show these separations. Secondly, state-of-the-art AI models rely
on significant amounts of chain-of-thought [WWS+ 22], which is empirically known to improve the
ability to reason by forcing the LLM to perform step-by-step “scratchpad”-style reasoning, which
has been shown to yield better accuracy and more expressivity in practice. Our transformer and
DLM lower bounds are proven under the assumption of no chain-of-thought and sublinear chain-
of-thought respectively, which are very strong assumptions; the lower bounds do not hold without
these restrictions in place, and indeed it is entirely conceivable that our problems are easy for
classical LLMs with a reasonable amount of chain-of-thought. The goal of this work, rather, is to
   8
     A recent work of Layden et al. [LSH+ 25] showed that the dynamics of continuous-model DLMs can be efficiently
simulated on a quantum computer.


                                                       11
initiate the study of the interplay between quantum circuits and classical machine learning models,
which we view as being timely and important in the era of large language models.

    Acknowledgments. SA thanks Yunchao Liu for pointing the work of [CPW25] and thanks
Hongxun Wu for clarifications about their work [CPW25]. SA thanks ChatGPT 5.5 for help in
proving Theorem 4.4 and the subsequent corollary. RS thanks ChatGPT for some minor corrections
in the parameterization of the transformer lower bound, which were since then strengthened by
hand. The presentation here has been rewritten and checked by us (any further mistakes are
our own).


2    Preliminaries and Background
Notation. We use base-2 logarithms throughout. We also define [n] := {1, . . . , n} for any natural
number n ∈ N and [n]0 := {0} ∪ [n].

Information theory. We will need some well-known results in information theory, such as
Pinsker’s inequality, which can all be found in [CT91]. For a distribution P on a finite set Ω,
its Shannon entropy is defined as:
                                               X                   1
                                    H(P ) :=         P (x) log         .
                                                                 P (x)
                                               x∈Ω

It is a fact that H(·) ≤ log|Ω|. For a random variable X, we write H(X) for the entropy of its law.
For random variables X, Y , the conditional entropy is defined as:

                                H(X | Y ) := Ey∼Y [H(X | Y = y)].

We will use the standard facts that:
                                                                           m
                                                                           X
                   H(X | Y ) ≤ H(X),         H(X1 , . . . , Xm | Y ) ≤           H(Xi | Y ).
                                                                           i=1

For two distributions P, Q on the same finite set Ω, their total variation distance is defined as:
                                    1X
                      TV(P, Q) :=      |P (x) − Q(x)|= sup |P (A) − Q(A)|.
                                    2                  A⊆Ω
                                       x∈Ω

We will also use the data processing inequality for total variation: if f : Ω → Ω′ is any map, then:

                                    TV(f (P ), f (Q)) ≤ TV(P, Q).

Equivalently, taking marginals cannot increase the total variation distance.
    We will need a couple of additional lemmas, as follows.

Lemma 2.1. Let P and Q be distributions on a finite product space T × Y. Then, we have:
                                                   
                      Et∼QT [TV PY |T =t , QY |T =t ] ≤ 2 · TV(P, Q),

where QT is the marginal distribution. The same bound also holds when the expectation is taken
with respect to PT in place of QT .

                                                   12
Lemma 2.2. Let P and W be distributions on a set X with TV(P, W ) = ϵ ≤ 1/4. Then, we have
|H(P ) − H(W )|≤ 2ϵ log|X |+1.

Proof. For ∥P − W ∥1 = 2ϵ ≤ 1/2, we have:

                                                       |X |                      1
                  |H(P ) − H(W )|≤ ∥P − W ∥1 log              = 2ϵ log|X |+2ϵ log ,
                                                    ∥P − W ∥1                    2ϵ

and u log(1/u) ≤ (log e)/e < 1 for u ∈ (0, 1].
                                                                                    p
Lemma 2.3. If µ is a distribution on {0, 1}r then TV(µ, unif({0, 1}r )) ≤               r − H(µ) .

Proof. First we observe that for distributions
                                           p µ, ν on a finite set, the total variation distance is
related to the KL divergence as TV(µ, ν) ≤ KL(µ∥ν). In particular, Pinsker’s inequality together
with KL(µ ∥ unif) = r − H(µ) gives the statement of the lemma.

2.1    Circuits
Classical circuit classes. The classes NC0 , AC0 , and TC0 are well-known in complexity theory.
NC0 is the class of all Boolean functions computable in a circuit family containing circuits with
bounded fan-in (i.e., the number of inputs to every gate is O(1) independent of n), constant depth
(i.e., every circuit in the family has depth O(1) independent of n, the number of inputs to the
circuit itself), and basis {∧, ∨, ¬}. AC0 is the class of all Boolean functions defined the same way
as NC0 , except that we allow the circuits to have unbounded fan-in. TC0 is the class of all Boolean
functions defined the same way as AC0 , except that we allow the circuits to have majority gates
(gates that output 1 if and only if a strict majority of their input bits are 1).
    In addition, we are also interested in GC0 (k), a classical circuit class defined recently [Kum23,
GK24], with a special type of gate allowed in addition to AC0 . For k ∈ N, a Gk gate takes in an
unbounded number of bits as input: on input x, if |x|≤ k, then Gk (x) can be an arbitrary function
on the input x and if |x|> k, then Gk (x) is some constant in {0, 1}. These are useful as a soft
generalization of threshold gates.

Quantum circuit classes. Parallel (and in some cases comparable) to the classical circuit hi-
erarchy is the hierarchy of quantum circuits. The two classes of importance for us are QNC0 and
QAC0 . A QNC0 circuit basis consists of all possible one- and two-qubit gates. For the sake of
succinctness, we allow the following in particular: Clifford gates, i.e.:
                                                                                
                                                                      1 0 0 0
                      1 1 1                    1 0                     0 1 0 0
               H=√                 ,    S=            ,     CNOT =    0 0 0 1 ,
                                                                                 
                       2 1 −1                  0 i
                                                                          0 0 1 0

and S, T -gates, i.e.:                                                    
                                          1 0                      1   0
                                 S=             ,        T =
                                          0 i                      0 eiπ/4
and Pauli matrices, i.e.:
                                                                                   
                  1 0               0 1                            0 −i              1 0
            I=            ,     X=        ,          Y =                  ,      Z=         .
                  0 1               1 0                            i 0               0 −1


                                                    13
We write these gates as above because all Pauli gates and Clifford gates are simulable, and the T
gate makes quantum computation universal.
    In order to describe QAC0 , we first observe what the CNOT gate does. It performs the following
operation:
                          CNOT : |a, b⟩ 7→ |a, a ⊕ b⟩ for all a, b ∈ {0, 1}.
This is a 2-qubit gate. If a = 1 it flips the second bit, whereas if a = 0, it keeps the second qubit
as it is. Consider a CCNOT gate (also referred to as Toffoli gate), defined as:

                    CCNOT : |a1 , a2 , b⟩ → |a1 , a2 , b ⊕ a1 · a2 ⟩ for all a1 , a2 , b ∈ {0, 1},

i.e., the gate flips the last bit if and only if the first 2 qubits are both 1. In order to describe QAC0 ,
we allow the circuits to have generalized CNOT (referred to as Toffoli gates) acting on t ∈ [n] qubits:

            Toffoli : |a1 , . . . , at , b⟩ 7→ |a1 , . . . , at , b ⊕ a1 · · · at ⟩ for all a1 , . . . , at , b ∈ {0, 1},

i.e., the gate flips the last bit if and only if the first t qubits are all 1. We can now describe the
two quantum circuit classes of interest to us.
   1. QNC0 , the set of circuits acting on: n input bits and poly(n) auxilliary qubits, constant depth,
      consisting of Paulis, Cliffords, S, and T gates.
   2. QAC0 , the set of circuits acting on: n input bits and poly(n) auxilliary qubits, constant depth,
      consisting of Paulis, Cliffords, T , and Toffoli gates.
The only difference between QNC0 and QAC0 is that the latter contains Toffoli gates, which are not
present in the former.

Notation for superconstant depths. Suppose we have a circuit family C from a circuit class (or
quantum circuit class) C, such that C has depth O(f (n)) (i.e., the depth of each circuit in the family
is allowed to be a function of the input length, instead of being a universal constant). In that case, we
write C belongs to C[f (n)]. In other words, C[f (n)] is the class of circuit families or quantum circuit
families whose depth grows as O(f (n)), but whose other parameters are defined by the class C. Now,
when f (n) = Ω(log n), typically the superscript of the circuit class goes up according to the degree of
the polylogarithmic factor; for instance, NC0 [log n] = NC1 , QAC0 [log n] = QAC1 , AC0 [log2 n] = AC2 ,
and so on. However, we will mainly be concerned with the case when f (n) = o(log n); in that case,
we will simply designate the resulting class as C[f (n)]. In particular, QAC0 [log log n] will be the
class of quantum circuits that are exactly QAC0 circuits, except that their depth can go up to
O(log log n).

2.2     Transformer models
We first describe in the figure below the structure of a transformer model. In the remaining part
of this section, we define various aspects of this transformer architecture and discuss how one goes
from the input to the output.

2.2.1    Definitions and Architecture
We now give a brief introduction to the basic transformer architecture. Apart from the choice of
the attention mechanism itself (which is typically taken to be a variant of softmax ), there are a few
other parameters that define a transformer:
   1. L: the number of layers

                                                                14
               Figure 1: An idealized depiction of the core transformer architecture.


   2. H: the number of attention heads in each layer
   3. d: the embedding dimension
   4. p: the bit precision of entries in the internal computations.
The context length n, which corresponds to the length of the input measured in tokens, is not a
parameter of the transformer; this is what enables a transformer to carry out its computations
on unbounded-length inputs. We often refer to L as the depth of the transformer, and to the
product Hdp as its width or size. Recent works [SHT23, CPW25] have adopted the convention of
designating a transformer as “small” if Hdp = no(1) and “large” if Hdp = nΩ(1) .
     A transformer with H heads and L layers computes a length-preserving sequence-to-sequence
function. It starts by breaking up some input text (the prompt) into a length-n sequence w =
                                                                                           (0)
w1 . . . wn of tokens, and then embeds each token wi into a (dH)-dimensional real vector xi ,
creating the n-sequence:                                        n
                                         (0)
                                 x(0) = x1 , . . . , x(0)
                                                      n    ∈  R dH


where each entry is represented using at most p bits. Subsequently, over the course of a sequence
of length-preserving internal computations through L layers in its architecture, the transformer
converts the original sequence into the sequence:
                                                               n
                                          (L)
                                x(L) = x1 , . . . , x(L)
                                                     n    ∈  R dH
                                                                     .

Each transformer layer contains H attention heads. The computation in the ℓ-th layer is determined
by query, key and value matrices indexed by their corresponding attention head, explicitly given
by Qℓ,h , K ℓ,h , V ℓ,h ∈ Rd×dH for ℓ ∈ [L], h ∈ [H]. These matrices are all determined (i.e., learned)
during training time, and are subsequently considered a complete specification to the transformer
architecture (which, in this model, carries out a deterministic computation on each given input).
We now describe the transition in between the layers of the transformer: if the input to the ℓ-th
layer is x(ℓ−1) , then the output x(ℓ) is determined as follows: for every position i ∈ [n], and attention



                                                   15
head h ∈ [H], define:
                             (ℓ,h)        1                 (ℓ−1)            (ℓ−1)
                           αi,j      :=      · exp(⟨Q(ℓ,h) xi     , K (ℓ,h) xj     ⟩),
                                          Zi
                       (ℓ)
where Zi := j exp(⟨xi Q(ℓ,h) , K (ℓ,h) xℓj ⟩). Note that this is where we have used the currently-
             P
used softmax attention, instead of other variants such as unique hard attention and average hard
attention that have been theoretically considered as well. Then, set:
                                  (ℓ,h)
                                            X (ℓ,h)          (ℓ)
                                yi      :=     αi,j V (ℓ,h) xj ∈ Rd .                          (5)
                                                   j

                                             (ℓ)             (ℓ,1)   (ℓ,H)
Now, we can concatenate the vectors yi             := (yi  , . . . , yi ) ∈ RdH , and then set:
                                                                       n
                                              (ℓ)
                                     y(ℓ) := y1 , . . . , yn(ℓ) ∈ RdH .

Finally, the output x(ℓ) of the ℓ-th layer is obtained via applying an arbitrary (learnable) function
g ℓ : RdH → RdH coordinate-wise to y(ℓ) , i.e.:
                                                                        
                                                 (ℓ)
                                    xℓ := g ℓ (y1 ), . . . , g ℓ (yn(ℓ) ) .

                                                       (L)
Usually, the transformer takes the vector xn ∈ RdH , applies a linear transformation to it along
with a sigmoid function to obtain a probability pout ∈ [0, 1], and then rounds this probability pout
to a value in {0, 1}. In this sense, a transformer can be seen as a language recognizer over its input
alphabet, and this is what enables us to place transformers inside or outside standard complexity
classes.

Decoder transformers. The definition above is for a general transformer. We say a transformer
is a decoder-only transformer if the sums in Eq. (5) and the definition of Zi are only over all j with
                                             (ℓ,h)
j < i. In other words, the values of yi            and Zi only depend on all the coordinates of x until
                              (ℓ)         (ℓ)
coordinate i, i.e., only on x1 , . . . , xi−1 . This requirement for each position to only attend to
positions before it is known as future masking, and it is what enables the autoregressive capabilities
of modern LLMs.

Chain-of-thought. In autoregressive decoder models, the architecture is equipped with the abil-
ity to output intermediate tokens during its computation process, which are then fed back to the
architecture by appending them to the (increasingly growing) input. This process is called chain-
of-thought (CoT); it is well known that CoT-equipped transformers are strictly more powerful in
terms of expressivity than transformers without CoT. Indeed, most modern LLMs use CoT-style
intermediate reasoning.

2.2.2   Complexity Class Relations
As we saw, viewing transformers as language recognizers enables us to compare their capabilities
with standard complexity classes. In this section, we provide a brief summary of the capabilities
of decoder-only transformers. Note that encoder-only transformers are theoretically strictly more
powerful than decoder-only ones, but recent LLMs focus almost exclusively on decoder-only models,
and so we will restrict ourselves to that model. We note that modern architectures allow intermedi-
ate tokens generated during the computation by a process called chain-of-thought (CoT). Allowing

                                                              16
ℓ intermediate tokens on an input of length n, where ℓ ∈ {0, . . . , log n} does not increase the com-
plexity class, but increasing ℓ further can certainly improve the expressivity of these transformers
(in fact, in the limit, arbitrary amount of chain-of-thought lets transformers Turing-complete). So,
the same table below applies even for chain-of-thought length up to ℓ = O(log n) [LLZM24].

                         Precision     Model dimension       Complexity class
                            O(1)               O(log n)             ⊆ AC0
                            O(1)               poly(n)              = AC0
                          O(log n)             O(log n)             ⊆ TC0
                          O(log n)             poly(n)              = TC0

Table 1: Summary of main results of [LLZM24] which simulates the transformer class with the
corresponding precision and model dimension in terms of standard circuit complexity classes.


2.2.3     Lower Bound via Communication Complexity
In a recent work, Chen et al. [CPW25] introduced an autoregressive communication model, and
showed that any unconditional lower bound on the communication complexity of a particular
problem in this model yields lower bounds on the width Hdp of any constant-depth transformer
designed to solve the same problem. The communication model is defined formally as follows.
There are L + 2 players (denoted players −1, 0, 1, . . . , L). For −1 ≤ i ≤ L, the input zi for player
i is describable using mi tokens. There is a (directional and restricted) communication protocol
for these players, which takes place over a certain number of epochs and a fixed bandwidth B, as
                   (0)
follows. Let Xℓ := zℓ , for ℓ ∈ {−1, . . . , L}, for ℓ ≥ 1, they proceed as follows. Every player
i ∈ {−1, . . . , L} runs the following:
                                                 (ℓ)                                                    (ℓ)
  1. For j > i, player i sends a message Γij to player j, depending solely on its current state Xi .
                                                             (ℓ)
  2. Player j replies back to player i with a message Πij that satisfies two constraints: (i) the
                   (ℓ)                         (ℓ)                             (ℓ)
        message Πji depends solely on Γij and player j’s current state Xj ; (ii) the size of the
                            (ℓ)
        message satisfies |Πji |≤ B · mi .
                                         (ℓ)                                             (ℓ)            (ℓ)
  3. Upon receiving the messages {Πji }j>i , player i updates its state to X (ℓ+1) := Xi ∪
                                                                                               S
                                                                                                   j>i Γij .

   After L rounds, player −1 should output the first bit of X (L) in order for the protocol to be
deemed successful.
    We now point out two nuances about this protocol.
   • Memorylessness. Suppose during epoch ℓ, players i, j interacted by exchanging the mes-
            (ℓ)   (ℓ)
     sages Γij , Πji , and so player i updated its current state X (ℓ+1) by including the transcript
                   (ℓ)
        message Πji . For a subsequent epoch, say ℓ + 1, by the protocol requirements, player j is
        forced to forget the previous exchange altogether. Since player j did not update its local state
                                (ℓ)  (ℓ)
        X (ℓ) → X (ℓ+1) using Γij , Πji and all messages solely depend on their local state, players are
        therefore forced to forget some information between epochs.
   • Local one-way-ness. Observe that in each epoch, when player i talked to player j, by the
     protocol requirements, player j cannot reply back to player i based on its interaction with
     the players {−1, . . . , j − 1}. In any given epoch, player j cannot respond to any of the players

                                                       17
      by “mixing” the input messages it received. Instead, it can only reply based on its current
             (ℓ)     (ℓ)
      state Xj and Πij .
The main result proven by Chen et al. [CPW25] is the following: they define the iterated index
function, called IterInx (which we formally define later in Section 3.2.1), and show how to give
lower bounds on the width of constant-depth decoder-only transformers computing IterInx, using
the communication protocol defined above. In particular, they show the following result.

Lemma 2.4. If there is an L-layer decoder-only transformer with width Hdp that solves IterInx for
all instances of the problem, then there is a deterministic autoregressive protocol on L + 2 players
that solves IterInx in L epochs with bandwidth 2Hdp.

2.3   Diffusion models
We first describe in the figure below the structure of a diffusion language model (DLM). In the
remaining part of this section, we define various aspects of this DLM architecture and discuss how
one samples a distribution using this model.




                  Figure 2: An idealized depiction of the core DLM architecture.

     We now describe the diffusion language model (DLM) framework used in this paper. In ab-
straction, a DLM is defined as a generative model for text [NZY+ 25, SZL+ 25] that starts from a
corrupted (masked or noisy) sequence of tokens, and iteratively denoises it. It is used typically to
generate samples from a learned distribution over text; more precisely, it learns one distribution
within a parameterized class of distributions that approximates the data. Informally, the goal is as
follows. Let:
                                       {Du : {0, 1}n → [0, 1]}u
be a family of target distributions. The goal of the DLM is the following task: on input u, generate
a sampled output string y ∼ Du . We also study approximate generation, where the DLM is allowed
to output a sample from a distribution D e u satisfying:

                                            e u , Du ) ≤ ε.
                                         TV(D

More formally, we present the usual convention of DLMs in literature (similar to the formalization
given in [JHC26]). Let V be a finite token vocabulary (for simplicity we let it be {0, 1} here) and


                                                18
let mask denote the so-called mask token. A state in a DLM algorithm is a sequence:

                                         x ∈ (V ∪ {mask})L .

A coordinate equal to mask is called masked or unresolved, while a coordinate in Σ has already
been assigned a token and is called resolved. A noiseless sequence is an element of V L . A predictor
is a map which, for every partially masked sequence x ∈ (V ∪ {mask})L , specifies a distribution:

                                           p(· | x) ∈ ∆(V L ),

i.e., the coordinate-wise conditional distribution of z ∼ p(· | x) is given by:
                                                    L
                                                    Y
                                       p(z | x) =         pi (z i | x).
                                                    i=1

In the standard model, already unmasked coordinates are kept fixed, i.e., pi (z i = xi | x) = 1
whenever xi ∈ V .

2.3.1   Masked states
The structure of a usual DLM algorithm is as follows: it begins from a partially masked state:
                                                             
                                               m−n          n
                                   |{z} | {z } | {z } ,
                                     x ,  mask       , mask
                                      input workspace/CoT output

and progressively resolves masked coordinates over several denoising rounds (which we define be-
low). After a fixed number of rounds, it outputs the final n coordinates, which are designated as
output coordinates. The goal is for the distribution of the final n coordinates to be “close” to the
target distribution Dx . The remaining coordinates are auxiliary workspace coordinates that may
be used during the computation and discarded at the end.
    We use the term workspace token for any auxiliary coordinate generated during the DLM com-
putation but discarded before the final output is read. In the DLM literature, such coordinates
are often interpreted as chain-of-thought (CoT) tokens when they serve as intermediate reasoning
or scratchwork. Since our lower bounds only use the formal role of these coordinates as auxil-
iary generated tokens available to later rounds, we use the terms workspace and chain-of-thought
interchangeably when no distinction is needed.

2.3.2   Denoising process
We now describe the denoising process. This process is a iterative procedure through which masked
coordinates are progressively resolved. Suppose the current state of the DLM at round t is:

                                        X (t) ∈ (Σ ∪ {mask})m .

A single denoising round consists of two conceptually distinct operations:
  1. scheduling/unmasking, where the model decides which masked coordinates will be updated
     in the current round;
  2. token generation, where the model generates values for the selected coordinates.
We describe both operations below in detail.

                                                    19
Scheduling/unmasking. At round t, the model selects a subset Rt (X (t) ) ⊆ [m] of currently
masked coordinates to reveal. Equivalently, one may think of the scheduler as outputting revealed
bits St,i (X (t) ) ∈ {0, 1}, where St,i (X (t) ) = 1 indicates that the coordinate i will be updated during
round t. The revealed set is therefore:

                                    Rt (X (t) ) = {i : St,i (X (t) ) = 1}.

The model then samples, independently for all i ∈ St :
                                            (t+1)
                                          Xi        ∼ pit (· | X (t) ),

and leaves all other coordinates unchanged. A key feature of DLMs is that the reveal schedule may
depend adaptively on the partially generated sequence so far. Thus, the model does not need to
decide the entire reveal order in advance; instead, future reveal decisions may depend on tokens
generated in earlier rounds, including both workspace/CoT coordinates and output coordinates.
An important aspect to consider here is how complex the scheduling is. As is common in the
DLM literature, we require that the scheduling rule itself be computationally shallow. Concretely,
for each coordinate i and round t, the reveal decision St,i (X (t) ) is computed by a constant-depth
polynomial-size circuit.

Token generation. Once the reveal set Rt (X (t) ) has been selected, the model generates token
values at those coordinates. The crucial and defining structural property of a standard DLM is the
following notion of conditional independence:
      Conditioned on the current state, newly revealed coordinates are sampled independently.
More precisely, conditioned on the current partially generated state X (t) , the model specifies
marginal distributions pt,i (· | X (t) ) for all i ∈ Rt (X (t) ), and samples:
                                                                    
                                              (t+1)
                                            Xi      ∼ pt,i · | X (t)

independently across coordinates. Thus, the conditional law of the newly generated coordinates
factorizes as:                                   O                
                                (t+1)
                          L (Xi       )i∈Rt X (t) =    pt,i · | X (t) .
                                                              i∈Rt

Intuitively, conditioned on the current partially generated sequence, a standard DLM generates
fresh coordinates in parallel using coordinate-wise denoising rules.

Execution as a branching process. It is useful to view a DLM execution as a branching process
over partially generated states. Each possible state τ = X (t) at the beginning of round t defines a
transcript branch of the computation. Conditioned on reaching a fixed partially generated state τ :
   • the reveal set Rt (τ ) is fixed,
   • the next batch of generated coordinates has the product law:
                                                          
                                 (t+1)
                                                              O
                          L (Xi        )i∈Rt (τ ) X (t) = τ =     pt,i (· | τ ).
                                                                          i∈Rt (τ )


We write pit (· | τ ) for the i-th marginal of the DLM predictor pt (· | τ ). Although the predictor
specifies a full product distribution on V L , only the coordinates selected by Rt (x) are actually

                                                      20
updated in the current denoising round. Thus, conditioned on a fixed partially generated state, the
next round of generation is a product distribution over the newly revealed coordinates. Globally,
however, the overall output distribution may still exhibit highly nontrivial correlations because
future rounds depend adaptively on previously generated tokens. Consequently, correlations may
accumulate across rounds through the interaction of adaptive scheduling and iterative denoising.

2.3.3    Constant-round shallow DLMs
As discussed before, a natural question in this set-up is how complex is the sample generation? In
particular, one must also account for the circuits implementing the scheduling and token-generation
steps. As is standard in the DLM literature, these steps are required to be computationally shallow.
Concretely, we assume that the number of denoising rounds is constant, i.e., T = O(1), and that
for every round t and coordinate i, both the scheduling rule St,i (X (t) ) and the denoising marginal
pt,i (· | X (t) ) are computable by constant-depth polynomial-size circuits. The work by Jiang et
al. [JHC26] studies this model with AC0 circuits, proving both positive and negative results. Since
our focus is on hardness, we prove our results even when these shallow circuits are allowed to be
GC0 circuits, effectively strengthening the lower bounds. Because the number of rounds is constant,
the entire generation process can be viewed as a constant-depth adaptive computation built from
repeated applications of shallow scheduling and coordinate-wise denoising steps.

2.3.4    Remasking and revision.
The basic denoising model described above only allows masked coordinates to be resolved over
time. Modern diffusion-style language models often consider stronger variants in which previously
generated coordinates may later be modified or revisited. Two common mechanisms are revision
[SZL+ 25] and remasking [NZY+ 25]. Intuitively speaking, in a remasking step, previously gener-
ated coordinates may be returned to the masked state and regenerated in later rounds, whereas
in a revision step, the model is allowed to overwrite or update tokens that were generated in ear-
lier rounds. Formally, in a remasking step, after the denoising update, the model applies a (possibly
randomized) remasking policy:
                                      Gt : (V ∪ {M})L → 2[L] .
For Tt = Gt (x), the coordinates i ∈ Tt are reset to mask. In the revision model, we relax the
standard condition that an unmasked coordinate must remain unmasked during the algorithm.
Thus, Rt (x) may include coordinates i with xi ∈ V , and the predictor marginal pit (· | x) may assign
some probability less than 1 to the current token xi . The coordinate-wise conditional independence
condition is still maintained:
                                                   L
                                                   Y
                                      pt (z | x) =    pit (z i | x).
                                                         i=1

     These mechanisms allow the model to iteratively refine earlier generations rather than commit-
ting permanently to the first generated value. Conceptually, remasking and revision substantially
strengthen the expressive power of the model: the generation process is no longer monotone in the
set of revealed coordinates, and tokens generated early in the computation may later be “corrected”
based on information obtained in subsequent rounds. We will prove our main lower bound in the
presence of both remasking and revision, making it explicit in our lower bounds.9
   9
     We remark that [JHC26] accounts for the cost of remasking/revision differently from ours: they allow arbitrarily
many tokens to be remasked or revised in any particular round, and only bound the total number of rounds of
revision. Here, we account for the total number of revision/remasking steps throughout the entire DLM computation.


                                                         21
3     Functional separation: quantum versus transformer models
3.1     Motivation for our candidate problem
In this section, we first give some motivation for our candidate problem that we use to separate
quantum shallow circuits from transformer models. The quantum circuits that we use for these
motivating functions will be eventually used when discussing our separation.

3.1.1    Index function
Our first observation is that the index function, denoted by Inx and defined below, is computable
with a shallow quantum circuit with minimal classical post-processing without requiring the full
power of QAC0 circuits, albeit the caveat that it requires copies of the input:

                      Inx : {0, 1}n × {0, 1}N → {0, 1}, such that Inx(i, x) = xi

for x ∈ {0, 1}N , where N = 2n . Formally, we have the following result.

Claim 3.1. Let n, N ∈ N such that N = 2n . Given N copies of the address i ∈ {0, 1}n and one
copy of x ∈ {0, 1}N , the index function Inx(i, x) can be computed by a quantum circuit with gate
complexity O(N log N ) followed by an OR gate. Moreover, the problem is in ∨ ◦ QNC0 [log log N ].

     Before we prove the result above, we introduce some simple quantum circuits that will be used
for the claim, as well as several subsequent arguments.

Quantum circuits for equality checks. We will often require a quantum subroutine for com-
puting an equality check of two strings y, z ∈ {0, 1}n , which we defined as [y = z]. We first present
a very simple circuit to compute the equality check.

Claim 3.2. Let n ∈ N. Given one copy of y, z ∈ {0, 1}n , the equality check [y = z] can be computed
by a quantum circuit over (3n + 1) qubits with gate complexity O(n) and depth O(log n).

Proof. We define a quantum circuit Aj with the following action:

                                         Aj
                        |y⟩ |z⟩ |0⟩n |0⟩ −→ |y⟩ |z⟩ ⊗ℓ∈[n] |[yℓ = zℓ ]⟩ |[y = z]⟩ .
                                                                       
                                                                                                  (6)

This is implemented as followed. Let the n-ancilla qubit register be denoted by s, and the ℓ-th
qubit by sℓ . Let the last ancilla qubit be denoted by t. For each ℓ ∈ [n], we apply a 3-qubit Toffoli
gate with controls over |yℓ ⟩, |zℓ ⟩, with the target being the qubit sℓ . This sets the state of the
n-ancilla register to ⊗ℓ∈[n] |[yℓ = zℓ ]⟩. We then apply an (n + 1)-qubit Toffoli gate with controls
over all of s, with the target being qubit t. The final state is then as given in Eq. (6).
    The circuit Aj is over 3n + 1 qubits. All the 3-qubit Toffoli gates can implemented in parallel
and with gate complexity of O(1) each (using O(1) additional ancilla qubits for each). The (n + 1)-
qubit Toffoli gate can be implemented with O(n) one- and two-qubit gate complexity, and depth
O(log n) (using O(n) additional ancillas). Overall, the gate complexity is O(n) and the depth is
O(log n). This completes the proof.

    The construction above can be modified to give a circuit requiring fewer qubits as input, and
which we will primarily use.



                                                    22
Claim 3.3. Let n ∈ N. Given one copy each of y, z ∈ {0, 1}n , the equality check [y = z] can be
computed by a quantum circuit over (n + 1) qubits with gate complexity O(n) and depth O(log n).

Proof. We first note that for a fixed z ∈ {0, 1}n , we have [y = z] = ℓ∈[n] [yℓ = zℓ ]. For all ℓ ∈ [n],
                                                                     V
the indicator function [yℓ = zℓ ] can be written as:
                                                    (
                                                     yℓ , zℓ = 1,
                                       [yℓ = zℓ ] =                                                  (7)
                                                     yℓ , zℓ = 0.

Define the (smaller) quantum circuit Aj as having the following action:10

                                                       Aj
                                           |y⟩ |0⟩ −→ |y⟩ |[y = z]⟩ .

This is implemented as follows. We apply a single-qubit X gate on the qubits of |y⟩ for which
zℓ = 0. This is in order to implement [yℓ = zℓ ] using Eq. (7). We then implement an (n + 1)-qubit
Toffoli gate with controls over the qubits of |y⟩ with the target being the last qubit. We then reset
the qubits of |y⟩ by applying a single-qubit X gate on those qubits of |y⟩ for which zℓ = 0 again.
Let us denote this last qubit as |t⟩. The circuit is then summarized below in Figure 3.


                                                        Aj
                    |y⟩      ⊗ℓ∈[n] Xℓ [zℓ = 0]             •      ⊗ℓ∈[n] Xℓ [zℓ = 0]       |y⟩

                    |0⟩                                                                     |t⟩ = |[y = z]⟩


                    Figure 3: Illustration of circuit Aj for equality check [x = y].

    The circuit Aj is applied over n+1 qubits accounting for the size of y and the additional ancilla
qubit. The circuit Aj used O(n) many single-qubit gates applied in parallel to each other and one
(n + 1)-controlled Toffoli gate. The latter has a one- and two-qubit gate complexity of O(n) and
requires depth O(log n) (when given O(n) clean ancillas). This completes the proof.

Quantum circuit (with copies) for computing index.                             We are now ready for the proof of
Claim 3.1.

Proof of Claim 3.1. We first observe that the index function can be written as a depth-3 DNF
circuit as follows:
                                                                           
                                _                  _           ^
                    Inx(i, x) =    [i = j] ∧ xj =       xj ∧     [iℓ = jℓ ] .
                                j∈{0,1}n                         j∈{0,1}n        ℓ∈[n]

We now describe a quantum circuit to compute the index function. Suppose we have N copies of
i, i.e., we are given N copies of the input (i, i, i, . . . , i). For one copy of i and a fixed j ∈ {0, 1}n ,
we will consider the quantum circuit Aj from Claim 3.3 (with instantiations of y as i, z as j there)
and slightly modify it to output xj ∧ [ij = j] (see Figure 4), which has the following action:

                                                  Aj
                                   |i⟩ |xj ⟩ |0⟩ −→ |i⟩ |xj ⟩ |xj ∧ [i = j]⟩ .

                                                            23
                                                           Aj
                        |i⟩       ⊗ℓ∈[n] Xℓ [jℓ = 0]        •       ⊗ℓ∈[n] Xℓ [jℓ = 0]              |i⟩

                      |xj ⟩                                 •                                       |xj ⟩
                       |0⟩                                                                          |tj ⟩ = |xj ∧ [ij = j]⟩


Figure 4: Illustration of quantum circuit Aj used for equality check [ij = j] and outputting the
corresponding bit xj if true.


Let us denote the last qubit as |tj ⟩ for a given j.
      To compute the index function, we now apply the circuit U composed of the smaller circuits
Aj for j ∈ {0, 1}n in parallel as follows:
                                                                n
                                                    A0 ⊗...⊗A2 −1
            (|i⟩ |x0 ⟩ |0⟩) . . . (|i⟩ |x2n −1 ⟩ |0⟩) −−−−−−−−−→ (|i⟩ |x0 ⟩ |t0 ⟩) . . . (|i⟩ |x2n −1 ⟩ |t2n −1 ⟩) ,

where we have used the equivalent integer representation of the index j when denoting xj and Aj .
We now note that each |tj ⟩ is either |0⟩ or |1⟩. We simply measure the qubits over all |tj ⟩ in the
computational basis, and obtain the measurement outcome tj = xj ∧ [i = j]. Applying an OR gate
over all j ∈ {0, 1}n then gives us:
                                    _             _
                                          tj =        [i = j] ∧ xj ,
                                           j∈{0,1}n        j∈{0,1}n

which is the desired index function computation. For each Aj , we used O(n) many single-qubit




Figure 5: Illustration of the circuit used for outputting Inx(i, x) using copies of |i⟩ and the circuit
of Aj , ∀j ∈ [N − 1]0 from Figure 4.

gates applied in parallel to each other and one (n+1)-controlled Toffoli gate (Claim 3.3). The latter
 10
      Note that we do not use a copy of z as a quantum input, unlike in Claim 3.2.


                                                              24
has a one- and two-qubit gate complexity of O(n) and requires depth O(log n) (when given O(n)
clean ancillas). Summing over all j ∈ {0, 1}n gives us a gate complexity of O(N log N ). Noting that
all Aj are applied in parallel, the depth of the circuit is O(log n) = O(log log N ). This completes
the proof.

3.1.2    Multi-index function
The natural next question for us is: can we remove the need for n copies in the QAC0 upper
bound? For this purpose, we can adopt a simple trick used in [GMW26]. Consider the index
function Inx : {0, 1}n × {0, 1}N → {0, 1}, defined as Inx(i, x) = xi . It is shown in [GMW26] that one
can consider the multi-index function MultInx : ({0, 1}n )N × {0, 1}N → {0, 1} defined as follows:

                                MultInx(i1 , . . . , iN , x) = [i1 = · · · = iN ] · xi1 ,

i.e., it first checks if all the n-bit length strings i1 , . . . , iN are equal (say equal to i ∈ {0, 1}n ) and,
based on that, outputs xi . The idea is now to say that the players in our protocol are each given
N copies of their input, and instead of solving single instances of Inx, they solve MultInx as above.
Checking if i1 = · · · = in is doable in QAC0 , so this does not add any significant complexity to the
circuit. Since we also have these many copies “for free” by definition, one can also compute xi .

Claim 3.4. Let n, N ∈ N such that N = 2n . Given {ik }k∈[N ] and one copy of x ∈ {0, 1}N , the func-
tion MultInx(i1 , . . . , iN , x) can be computed by a quantum circuit with gate complexity O(N log N )
followed by an AND gate11 . Moreover, the problem is in ∧ ◦ QNC0 [log log N ].

Proof. Recall that the multi-index function is:

                                MultInx(i1 , . . . , iN , x) = [i1 = · · · = iN ] · xi1 .

We now describe a quantum circuit used to compute the multi-index function. We are given the
input (i1 , i2 , . . . , iN ) and x. We first define a quantum circuit U1 to check the indicator [i1 = · · · =
iN ]. Let us introduce N n ancilla qubits {ok,ℓ }k∈[N ],ℓ∈[n] with each initialized to |0⟩ and an ancilla
qubit s initialized to |0⟩. We first apply a layer of N n CNOTs in parallel with a CNOT gate from
each ik,ℓ to ok,ℓ for all k ∈ [N ], ℓ ∈ [n]. This has the effect of setting the state of ok,ℓ to that of ik,ℓ .
We then apply another layer of CNOTs in parallel with a CNOT gate from each ik+1,ℓ to ok,ℓ , for all
k ∈ [N ], ℓ ∈ [n]12 At this point, the state of each |ok,ℓ ⟩ is |ik,ℓ ⊕ ik+1,ℓ ⟩. Applying a single-qubit X
gate on each ok,ℓ then sets the state to be the indicator [ik,ℓ = ik+1,ℓ ], i.e., |ok,ℓ ⟩ = |[ik,ℓ = ik+1,ℓ ]⟩.
We could now measure all the qubits over {ok,ℓ } in the computational basis and apply an AND gate
over the measurement outcomes to obtain the value of [i1 = . . . = iN ]. However, we will postpone
this step after describing how to obtain xi1 in case [i1 = · · · = iN ] = 1.
    To obtain xi1 , we proceed similarly as we had in Claim 3.1. For each j ∈ {0, 1}n , we consider
the quantum circuit Aj from Claim 3.3 (with instantiations of y as ij , z as j, x as x and j as the
integer corresponding to the given binary representation here) taking as input |ij ⟩, |xj ⟩, and an
additional ancilla qubit initialized to 0, which has the following action:

                                                   Aj
                                    |ij ⟩ |xj ⟩ |0⟩ −→ |i⟩ |xj ⟩ |xj ∧ [ij = j]⟩ .
  11
      Throughout this paper, we assume without loss of generality that NOT gates are free, simply by increasing the
size of the circuits by at most a constant factor (using De Morgan’s laws)
   12
      We actually mean from i(k+1) modN,ℓ to ok,ℓ so that the bits of i1 are chosen for k = N .




                                                          25
Let us denote that last qubit as |tj ⟩ for a given j. To compute the multi-index function, we now
apply the circuit U composed of the smaller circuits Aj for j ∈ {0, 1}n in parallel as follows:
                         (|i1 ⟩ |x0 ⟩ |0⟩) . . . (|iN ⟩ |xN −1 ⟩ |0⟩) |0⟩N n
                                (A0 ⊗...⊗AN −1 )U1
                               −−−−−−−−−−−→
                                                                                                  
                         (|i1 ⟩ |x0 ⟩ |t0 ⟩) . . . (|iN ⟩ |xN −1 ⟩ |tN −1 ⟩) ⊗k∈[N ],ℓ∈[n] |ok,ℓ ⟩ ,
where we have used the equivalent integer representation of the index j when denoting xj and Aj .
We note that |tj ⟩ = |xj ∧ [ij = j]⟩ for each j. We now simply measure the qubits over all |tj ⟩ in the
computational basis and obtain the measurement outcome tj = xj ∧ [i = j]. We also measure the
qubits over all |ok,ℓ ⟩ in the computational basis to obtain the measurement outcomes ok,ℓ . Applying
an AND gate over all the measurement outcomes {ok,ℓ }k∈[N ],ℓ∈[n] gives us s, which has the value:
                                     Y
                                s=          [ik,ℓ = ik+1,ℓ ] = [i1 = · · · = iN ].
                                      k∈[N ],ℓ∈[n]

Applying an OR gate over all tj measurement outcomes gives us t, which has the value:
                                    _          _
                              t=        tj =       xj ∧ [ij = j].
                                           j∈{0,1}n         j∈{0,1}n

Applying a two-bit AND gate on s and t gives us:
                                                                                                                
                                _                                         _
    st = [i1 = · · · = iN ] ·    xj ∧ [ij = j] = [i1 = · · · = iN ] ·                               xj ∧ [i1 = j] ,
                                  j∈{0,1}n                                                 j∈{0,1}n

where we noted in the second equality that st takes a non-zero value only if [i1 = · · · = iN ] = 1,
in which case, we can replace ij with i1 in the second term. This would then compute the MultInx
function. We note that we can replace the above classical processing with just one AND gate over
the measurement outcomes of {tj } and {ok,ℓ } with interleaved NOT gates by using DeMorgan’s
laws. The circuit U1 uses O(N log N ) many CNOT gates and has depth 2. For each Aj , we used
O(n) many single-qubit gates applied in parallel to each other and one (n + 1)-controlled Toffoli
gate. The latter has a one- and two-qubit gate complexity of O(n) and requires depth O(log n)
(when given O(n) clean ancillas). Summing over the gates in Aj for all j ∈ {0, 1}n and U1 gives
us a gate complexity of O(N log N ). Noting that all Aj are applied in parallel, the depth of the
overall circuit U is O(log n) = O(log log N ). This completes the proof.

3.2     Final candidate function
3.2.1    Iterated index function
Parameter choices. Fix the transformer parameters H, d, p, L, i.e., the number of heads, model
dimension, precision and number of layers. We use the same parameter setting as in [CPW25]:
we will first define T = Hdp, which is the bandwidth of the players. With this, the remaining
parameters are defined as follows:
                                                     PL−1  ℓ
         K(T, L) = (T L)8 ,       m(T, L) = K         ℓ=0 8 +1    ,
                                                                               ℓ
                         4·8L−ℓ−1
                                                                               Y
         nℓ (T, L) = K              for ℓ ∈ [L − 1],        Nℓ (T, L) = m ·          nj for ℓ ∈ {0, . . . , L − 1}.
                                                                               j=1

We will sometimes drop the (T, L) dependence when it is clear from the context.

                                                             26
Iterated index function. For the iterated index function as defined by [CPW25], the input is
a tuple (w, z0 , z1 , . . . , zL ), where:
   1. w = (w1 , . . . , wL−1 ) has L − 1 components, with wℓ ∈ [nℓ ];
   2. the first argument z0 ∈ [m] is referred to as the seed ;
   3. each {zℓ }ℓ∈[L] is a function satisfying zℓ : [Nℓ−1 ] → [Nℓ−1 ]. We identity the input [Nℓ−1 ] with
      [nℓ−1 ] × [Nℓ−2 ] since Nℓ−1 = nℓ−1 · Nℓ−2 (so we may write zℓ (wℓ−1 , iℓ−1 ) for ℓ ≥ 2).
With this notation, the input to player ℓ has size:
                                            L−1
                                            Y
                                 A−1 =            [nℓ ],   A0 = [m],   Aℓ := [Nℓ−1 ]Nℓ−1 .
                                            ℓ=1

The goal of the iterated index problem is to simply compute the following function: on input
(w, z0 , z1 , . . . , zL ) ∈ A−1 × A0 × A1 × · · · × AL , output IterInx(w, z0 , . . . , zL ) := iL , where:

          i0 = z0 ,    i1 = z1 (i0 ),   i2 = z2 (w1 , i1 ), · · · , iℓ+1 = zℓ+1 (wℓ , iℓ )   for   ℓ ∈ [L − 1].

Intuition. For some intuition, the reason we think of the expression above as an iterated index is
as follows. Consider player 1, who receives the truth table of z1 : [N0 ] → [N0 ] (i.e., a message with
(N0 )log N0 bits), and needs to produce the i0 -th index in the truth table of z1 , which we denote
i1 . Now, similarly, player 2 receives the truth table of z2 : [N1 ] → [N1 ] and needs to output the
(w1 , i1 )-th index of this truth table z2 (which we denote as z2 (w1 , i1 )). This procedure iteratively
continues for L − 1 rounds before player L player outputs zL (wL−1 , iL−1 ) and passes this index to
the final player, player (L + 1). This final player (L + 1) outputs zL+1 (wL , iL ), which is the intended
value of the function.

Theorem 3.5 ([CPW25, Theorem 4.1]). There exists αL = 2−O(L) with the following property.
Every deterministic autoregressive protocol for IterInx on the parameters (K, m, {nℓ }, {Nℓ }), with L
epochs and bandwidth B ≤ T satisfies:

                                                      B ≥ norig (T, L)αL ,

                                                             2O(L) is the total token length of the input.13
                                        P
where norig (T, L) := 1 + 1 +           ℓ∈[L] Nℓ−1 ∼ K


3.2.2       Iterated multi-index function
Parameter choices. We retain all parameter choices from the iterated index problem above
(K, m, nℓ , Nℓ as functions of T = Hdp and L), and introduce one additional parameter, the copy
parameter :
                                              L
                                              Y        L−1
                                                       Y
                                   t(T, L) :=   Nℓ−1 =     Nℓ .                             (8)
                                                            ℓ=1         ℓ=0

As before, we drop the (T, L) dependence when the context is clear.

Iterated multi-index function. The iterated multi-index function is the t-copy extension                of
                                                    (s)         (s)          (s)                  (s)
the iterated index function. The input is a tuple {w }s∈[t] , {z0 }s∈[t] , {z1 }s∈[t] , . . . , {zL }s∈[t] ,
where, for each s ∈ [t]:
  13
       We will prove this final upper bound expression on norig (T, L) shortly.


                                                               27
                (s)       (s)                           (s)
  1. w(s) = (w1 , . . . , wL−1 ) ∈ A−1 , i.e., wℓ ∈ [nℓ ] for ℓ ∈ [L − 1];
                (s)
  2. the seed z0 ∈ A0 = [m];
                  (s)                             (s)
  3. each table zℓ ∈ Aℓ is a function zℓ : [Nℓ−1 ] → [Nℓ−1 ], with the same identification of [Nℓ−1 ]
     with [nℓ−1 ] × [Nℓ−2 ] as in the iterated index problem.
The per-role input domain in the iterated multi-index problem is the t-fold product:

                          L−1
                                    !t
                 t
                          Y                                                                   t
                A−1 =           [nℓ ]      ,    A0t = [m] t ,       Aℓt = [Nℓ−1 ]Nℓ−1              for ℓ ∈ [L].
                          ℓ=1

Define the consistency predicate as:
                                                                            
                        
                     (s)          w(s) = w(1) ∧ z0(s) = z0(1) ∧    (s)  (1)
                              ^                                  ^
        E {w(s) }, {zℓ } :=                                        zℓ = zℓ  ∈ {0, 1},
                                  s∈[t]                                               ℓ∈[L]

i.e., E = 1 iff all t copies of each input component agree.
                                                            The goal of the iterated
                                                                                     multi-index
                                                            (s)   (s)         (s)
problem is to compute the following function: on input {w }, {z0 }, . . . , {zL } , output:
                                                                                          
                               (s)                 (s)                   (1) (1)           (1)
        IterMultInx {w(s) }, {zℓ } := E {w(s) }, {zℓ } · IterInx w(1) , z0 , z1 , . . . , zL .

In other words: if every component is internally consistent across the t copies, output the iterated
index value on those (common) inputs; otherwise output 0.
     Intuition. We again provide some intuition for this candidate problem, and why we call it
iterated multi-index. First, observe that if:
                                          (s)     (1)    (s)        (1)
                        wis = w1 , z0 = z0 , zℓ                = zℓ       for all s ∈ [t], ℓ ∈ [L],               (9)

that means that the players are just get the same input string several times. Once that is the case,
                                                  (1)
the players can just treat their input as w(1) , zi for i ∈ {0, . . . , L} and just run the usual index
protocol. But recall that in order to compute even a single instance of the index problem, the
QNC0 circuit requires copies of the index, which is not available for free. Having t copies of the
individual input has the effect of providing these copies “for free”, and part of the input for the
QNC0 circuit we will construct. It is clear that having just one copy would be equivalent to the
iterated index problem. Indeed, the “diagonal” version of the problem above is exactly the iterated
index problem (whose lower bound will be crucial in proving our lower bound). For the off-diagonal
elements, we simply enforce the condition that if any of the equalities in Eq. (9) are not met, then
the overall function just evaluates to 0.

3.3   Quantum upper bound
Iterated index function.          We have the following main result regarding the computation of the
iterated index function.

Theorem 3.6. Let L ∈ N, L ≥ 2, nℓ , Nℓ ∈ N for all ℓ ∈ [L − 1] such that Nℓ = 2nℓ , for all
                            L
ℓ ∈ [L − 1]. Given K O(L8 ) copies of each of {wℓ }ℓ∈[L−1] , i0 , and {zℓ }ℓ∈[L] , the iterated-index
                                                                                    L
function IterInx can be computed by a quantum circuit with gate complexity O(K L8 log K) followed
by an AND gate. Moreover, the problem is in ∧ ◦ QNC0 [log log K].

                                                               28
Proof. Denote the input to the algorithm as:

                              X = (w, z0 , z1 , . . . , zL ), where w = (w1 , . . . , wL−1 ).

Recall that the iterated-index computation is then the following sequence of computations starting
from the initial seed z0 :

                 i0 = z0 ,      i1 = z1 (i0 ),     iℓ+1 = zℓ+1 (wℓ , iℓ )       for every    ℓ ∈ [L − 1].

Explicitly, the intermediate computations are:

                       i2 = z2 (w1 , i1 ),    i3 = z3 (w2 , i2 ),     ...,     iL = zL (wL−1 , iL−1 ).

One approach would of course be to sequentially and recursively prepare the intermediate indices
i1 , i2 , . . . , iL−1 on quantum registers, which are the inputs to the truth tables z2 , z3 , . . . , zL . How-
ever, this might increase depth. So, instead, we verify all possible computation histories in parallel.
    Note that the input to the final truth table zL is of size NL−1 . A candidate computation history
up to zL is a tuple:

                                        τ = (r1 , . . . , rL−1 , a0 , a1 , . . . , aL−1 ),                  (10)

where:
                         a0 ∈ [N0 ],     aℓ ∈ [Nℓ−1 ],       rℓ ∈ [nℓ ]      for      1 ≤ ℓ ≤ L − 1.
For a fixed τ , let Constτ (X) denote the predicate that all of the following conditions hold:

                                z0 = a0 ,                                                                   (11)
                                wℓ = rℓ           for every 1 ≤ ℓ ≤ L − 1,                                  (12)
                                z1 (a0 ) = a1 ,                                                             (13)
                                zℓ+1 (rℓ , aℓ ) = aℓ+1          for every 1 ≤ ℓ ≤ L − 2.                    (14)

In particular, for every τ , Constτ (X) checks if X is a valid iterated index transcript. Note that
exactly one τ ∗ satisfies Constτ ∗ (X) = 1. For this τ ∗ and hence when Constτ (X) = 1, we need to
compute the output of zL (wL−1 , aL−1 ). To this end, for every b ∈ [log(NL−1 )], define:

                                 Cτ,b (X) := ¬ (Constτ (X) ∧ ¬zL (rL−1 , aL−1 )b ) ,                        (15)

where the subscript b indicates the bit position of zL (rL−1 , aL−1 ) (which is viewed as a vector in
{0, 1}log NL−1 ). For every invalid history τ ̸= τ ∗ , we have Constτ (X) = 0, and hence Cτ,b (X) = 1.
For the unique valid history τ ∗ , we have Constτ ∗ (X) = 1, and hence:
                                                 ∗
                                                       , a∗L−1 )b = zL (wL−1 , iL−1 )b ,
                                                                 
                       Cτ ∗ ,b (X) = ¬ 1 ∧ ¬zL (rL−1

where we have used the fact that Constτ ∗ (X) = 1 indicates rL−1∗  = wL−1 , a∗L−1 = iL−1 in the second
equality. Taking an AND over all histories then gives us:
                                    
                ^                ^
                   Cτ,b (X) =      1 ∧ Cτ ∗ ,b (X) = Cτ ∗ ,b (X) = zL (wL−1 , iL−1 )b .          (16)
                   τ                    τ ̸=τ ∗

Doing this over all b ∈ [log(NL−1 )] in parallel would then yield the desired result of zL (wL−1 , iL−1 ).

                                                               29
    We now describe the corresponding circuit and analyze the corresponding copy complexity,
gate complexity and depth. Let T denote the set of all candidate histories. There are:
                                    L−1
                                              ! L−1 ! L−1
                                     Y             Y          Y
                           |T |= N0      Nℓ−1          nℓ =      Nℓ                    (17)
                                                       ℓ=1                ℓ=1            ℓ=0

choices for τ and hence the size of T , where we used the definition of NL−1 = N0 L−1
                                                                                  Q
                                                                                    ℓ=1 nℓ . Thus,
the entire construction will use |T | many copies of the input X with one copy for each candidate
history τ ∈ T .
    For a fixed τ ∈ T , we now describe a circuit to compute Cτ,b (X), ∀b ∈ [log NL−1 ] (Eq. (15)).
Let us define |X (τ ) ⟩ as a portion of the copy of the input X assigned to the computation history
τ = (r1 , . . . , rL , a0 , a1 , . . . , aL−1 ) (Eq. (10)):
                   X (τ ) := (w, z0 , z1 (a0 ), z2 (r1 , a1 ), . . . , zℓ (rℓ , aℓ ), . . . , zL−1 (rL−2 , aL−2 ))            (18)
Once τ is fixed, all the involved addresses in zℓ+1 (rℓ , aℓ ), ∀ℓ ∈ [L−2] are fixed. We will now describe
a circuit Uτ with the following action on inputs of |X (τ ) ⟩, |zL (rL−1 , aL−1 )⟩ along with 2 log NL−1
ancilla qubits:
                                  ⊗ logN                                            ⊗ logN
                   |X (τ ) ⟩ |0⟩           L−1   |zL (rL−1 (rL−1 , aL−1 )⟩ |0⟩               L−1

               U                                 ⊗ logN
               τ
                 |X (τ ) ⟩ |Constτ (X)⟩
                                                                                                                
              −→                                          L−1   |zL (rL−1 (rL−1 , aL−1 )⟩ ⊗b∈[log NL−1 ] |Cτ,b ⟩ .            (19)

    For the equality check of Constτ (X) := [X τ = τ ], we use the quantum circuit from Claim 3.3
(with instantiations of y as X (τ ) , z as τ ) which we denote by Aτ and has the following action on
input |X (τ ) ⟩ and an additional ancilla qubit initialized to |0⟩:
                                                             A
                                             |X (τ ) ⟩ |0⟩ −−→
                                                             τ
                                                               |X (τ ) ⟩ |Constτ (X)⟩ .                                       (20)
Thus, Aτ checks whether the involved truth tables are equal to the fixed strings specified by τ .
Adding (log(NL−1 ) − 1) additional ancilla qubits initialized to |0⟩, we can copy over the value of
Constτ (X) to these ancilla qubits using a CNOT-tree of depth O(log log NL−1 ) and gate complexity
O(log NL−1 ). We denote this subcircuit by CNOTtree . We have the following so far:
                            Aτ                                       CNOTtree
     |X (τ ) ⟩ |0⟩log NL−1 −−→ |X (τ ) ⟩ |Constτ (X)⟩ |0⟩log NL−1 −1 −−−−−−→ |X (τ ) ⟩ |Constτ (X)⟩log NL−1 .
Recalling the definition of Cτ,b from Eq. (15), we now proceed as follows. Consider the input of the
state |zL (rL−1 , aL−1 )⟩ and log NL−1 many additional ancilla qubits initialized to |0⟩ with each one
corresponding to b ∈ [log NL−1 ] and denoted by tτ,b . Let us also denote the qubit corresponding to
zL (rL−1 , aL−1 )b as sb for all b ∈ [log NL−1] ]. For each b ∈ [log NL−1 ], we then apply an X gate on
qubit sb followed by a 3-qubit Toffoli gate with controls on sb and b-th copy of |Constτ (X)⟩ with
the target being tτ,b . We then apply another X gate on the target qubit tτ,b and an X gate on
qubit sb to reset it. We will denote the above sequence of gates as Bτ,b for each b ∈ [log NL−1 ].
Noting that we can apply all the subcircuits Bτ,b in parallel, we can define the overall circuit
as Bτ := ⊗b∈[log NL−1 ] Bτ,b since each of the qubits sb for b ∈ [log NL−1 ] is unique and can be
individually addressed, and we have a copy of |Constτ (X)⟩ for each such b. The circuit Bτ then
has the following action:
                              log NL−1                                    ⊗ log NL−1
     |X (τ ) ⟩ |Constτ (X)⟩              |zL (rL−1 (rL−1 , aL−1 )⟩ |0⟩
                                                                                                                              
 B                            ⊗ log NL−1
  τ
−−→ |X (τ ) ⟩ |Constτ (X)⟩                 |zL (rL−1 (rL−1 , aL−1 )⟩           ⊗        |¬ (Constτ (X) ∧ ¬zL (rL−1 , aL−1 )b )⟩ .
                                                                                                                               
                                                                           b∈[log NL−1 ]  |               {z                 }
                                                                                                      :=Cτ,b (X)



                                                                     30
 The desired circuit Uτ in Eq. (19) is then Uτ := Bτ (CNOTtree ⊗ I)(Aτ ⊗ I) applied to the input
states as described in Eq. (19).
       Applying the circuits Uτ in parallel for all τ ∈ T would then simply produce:
                                                                                 
                  ⊗τ ∈T |X (τ ) ⟩ |0⟩⊗ log NL−1 |zL (rL−1 , aL−1 )⟩ |0⟩⊗ log NL−1
         ⊗τ ∈T Uτ
                       h                                                                           i
        −−−−−→ ⊗τ ∈T |X (τ ) ⟩ |Constτ (X)⟩⊗ log NL−1 |zL (rL−1 , aL−1 )⟩ ⊗b∈[log NL−1 ] |Cτ,b (X)⟩ .

Measuring the qubits tτ,b which hold the state |Cτ,b ⟩ in the computational basis for all τ ∈ T , b ∈
[log NL−1 ] and then applying the AND logical gate over the outcomes corresponding to τ ∈ T for
each b ∈ [log NL−1 ] then gives us the desired result of Eq. (16). 14
     We now analyze the number of qubits required and the gate complexity of the overall cir-
cuit. For each τ ∈ T , the total number of input qubits involved in defining |X (τ ) ⟩ (Eq. (18)),
|zL (rL−1 , aL−1 )⟩, and the ancilla qubits is:
                                        L−1           L−1            L−1
                                                                !              !
                                        X             X              X
                     Qτ = O log N0 +         log nℓ +     log Nℓ = O     log Nℓ ,
                                          ℓ=1          ℓ=0                  ℓ=0

where we have noted that the size of the input and output to each zℓ requires ⌈log Nℓ−1 ⌉ bits to
                                                                  L−ℓ−1          L
specify. Using the fact that Nℓ = m · ℓj=1 nj , nℓ (T, L) = K 4·8       , m = K 8 and that L is
                                       Q
constant from the parameter choices described in Section 3.2.1, we then have that:
                                     Qτ = O L23L log K .
                                                         

Taking into account the size of T from Eq. (17) and our choice of the parameters, the total number
of qubits used is:
                                                       L
                                        |T |Qτ = K O(L8 ) .
Moreover, the total number of copies of the input X used to define |X (τ ) ⟩ and |zL (rL−1 , aL−1 ⟩ for
                                           L
each τ ∈ T goes as |T | and hence is K O(L8 ) .
       For each τ ∈ T , the contribution to gate complexity of Uτ is due to Aτ , which requires:
                                        L−1
                                                  !
                                        X
                                    O       log Nℓ = O(L23L log K)
                                         ℓ=0

one- and two-qubit gates (Claim 3.3) (i.e., Qτ ) due to the size of X (τ ) , CNOTtree which has gate
complexity O(log NL−1 ), and Bτ which has gate complexity O(log NL−1 ). Overall, the gate com-
plexity is then:                                                    
                                                             L
                           |T |O(L23L log K) = O L23L K L8 log K .
Since all the Uτ s are applied in parallel, the depth of the quantum circuit before the application of
the AND gate is the same as the depth of any particular Uτ . The contribution to the depth of Uτ
is O(L + log L + log log K) from Aτ or O(log Qτ ) (Claim 3.3), an additional O(log log NL−1 ) due
to CNOTtree , and finally an additional O(1) depth due to Bτ . Overall, the depth of the quantum
circuit is then:
                                      O (L + log L + log log K) .
This places IterInx in ∧ ◦ QNC0 [log log K]. This completes the proof.
  14
    Note for a specified bit b, we only require one AND gate at the end. Alternately if the goal is to output
[β = zL (wL−1 , iL−1 )], we can add β on to log NL−1 qubits, measure these in the computational basis and then
perform a large AND gate over all the measurement outcomes from before along with these.


                                                     31
Iterated multi-index function. We have the following main result regarding the computation
of the iterated multi-index function.

Theorem 3.7. Let L ∈ N, L ≥ 2, nℓ , Nℓ ∈ N for all ℓ ∈ [L − 1] such that Nℓ = 2nℓ , for all
                                                L            (s)           (s)       (s)
ℓ ∈ [L − 1], and fix β ∈ [NL−1 ]. Set t = K O(L8 ) . Given {wℓ }ℓ∈[L−1] , i0 , and {zℓ }ℓ∈[L] for all
                                                 (s)        (s)      (s)
s ∈ [t], the output of [β = IterMultInx({wℓ }ℓ , i0 , {zℓ }ℓ )] can be computed in ∧ ◦ QNC0 [log log K]
                                   L
with total gate complexity O(K L8 log K).

Proof. The proof proceeds similarly to that of Theorem 3.6. For every s ∈ [t], denote the s-th input
as:
                                (s) (s)           (s)                 (s)          (s)
               X (s) = (w(s) , z0 , z1 , . . . , zL ), where w(s) = (w1 , . . . , wL−1 ).        (21)
Let X = {X (s) }s∈[t] denote the entire input and define:

                                                           t
                                                           ^
                                         E(X) :=               [X (s) = X (1) ]                                        (22)
                                                           s=1

as the consistency predicate across all Xs. By definition, we have:
                                                
                          IterMultInx {X }s∈[t] = E(X)IterInx(X (1) ).
                                          (s)
                                                                                                                       (23)

As in Theorem 3.6, we will proceed by comparing the input against all possible candidate compu-
                                        (1) (1)   (1)
tation histories up to computation of zL (wL−1 , iL−1 ). We will adopt the notation from there by
letting T denote the set of candidate computation histories:

                                  τ = (a0 , a1 , . . . , aL−1 , r1 , . . . , rL−1 ),

where:

          a0 ∈ [N0 ],     aℓ ∈ [Nℓ−1 ]    for 1 ≤ ℓ ≤ L − 1, and rℓ ∈ [nℓ ]                       for 1 ≤ ℓ ≤ L − 1.

The number of such histories is:
                                               L−1                 L−1
                                                            !                   ! L−1
                                               Y                   Y              Y
                              |T |= N0               Nℓ−1                  nℓ           Nℓ = t,
                                               ℓ=1                  ℓ=1           ℓ=0

which is precisely the copy parameter from before. Let us order the candidate histories and let τ (s)
denote the sth computation history in T where s ∈ [t]. We can then denote the components of τ (s)
             (s) (s)           (s)    (s)          (s)
as τ (s) = (a0 , a1 , . . . , aL−1 , r1 , . . . , rL−1 ).
     For a fixed history τ (s) ∈ T and hence fixed s ∈ [t], define Constτ (s) (X (s) ) as the predicate that
all of the following conditions hold:
                                         (s)         (s)
                                      z0 = a0 ,
                                         (s)         (s)
                                     wℓ = rℓ                      for every 1 ≤ ℓ ≤ L − 1,
                                 (s) (s)     (s)
                                z1 (a0 ) = a1 ,
                           (s)   (s) (s)     (s)
                          zℓ+1 (rℓ , aℓ ) = aℓ+1                  for every 1 ≤ ℓ ≤ L − 2.                             (24)



                                                             32
Thus Constτ (s) (X (s) ) checks whether the copy X (s) is consistent with the history τ (s) up to the
                    (s)
computation of zL , ∀s ∈ [t]. Exactly as in the proof of Theorem 3.6, note that exactly one τ ∗ ∈ T
satisfies Constτ ∗ (X (s) ) = 1. For this τ ∗ (and hence when Constτ ∗ (X (s) ) = 1), we need to compute
                 (s)    ∗
the output of zL (wL−1      , a∗L−1 ) (where we have decorated the components of τ ∗ with superscript ∗).
To this end, for every b ∈ [log(NL−1 )], define:
                                                                                         
                                                                         (s) (s)    (s)
                         Cτ (s) ,b (X (s) ) := ¬ Constτ (s) (X (s) ) ∧ ¬zL (rL−1 , aL−1 )b ,        (25)

                                                            (s)      (s)        (s)
where the subscript b indicates the bit position of zL (rL−1 , aL−1 ) (which is viewed as a vector
in {0, 1}log NL−1 ). For every invalid history τ (s) ̸= τ ∗ , we have Constτ (s) (X (s) ) = 0, and hence
Cτ (s) ,b (X (s) ) = 1. For the unique valid history τ ∗ , we have Constτ ∗ (X (s) ) = 1, and hence:
                                                            
                                           (s) ∗                 (s) (s)    (s)
                     Cτ ∗ ,b (X) = ¬ 1 ∧ ¬zL (rL−1 , a∗L−1 )b = zL (wL−1 , iL−1 )b ,                (26)

                                                                  ∗                   (s)    (s)
where we have used the fact that Constτ ∗ (X (s) ) = 1 indicates rL−1 = wL−1 , a∗L−1 = iL−1 in the
second equality.
     We next define our approach to evaluate E(X) (Eq. (22)). First, let R denote the number of
bits used to encode one copy X (s) . For every s ∈ [t − 1] and bit position j ∈ [R], define:
                                                      (s)         (s+1)
                                     Ds,j (X) := [Xj        = Xj           ].

It is then immediate that:
                                       t−1
                                       ^ ^ R
                                                 Ds,j (X) = E(X),                                   (27)
                                       s=1 j=1

which evaluates to 1 if and only if all copies X (s) , ∀s ∈ [t] are identical. For the b-th output bit,
define:                                                                      
                                     t−1
                                     ^ ^  R               ^
                         Fb (X) :=          Ds,j  ∧        Cτ (s) ,b (X (s) ) .               (28)
                                       s=1 j=1               s∈[t]

We claim that:                                                    
                                 Fb (X) = IterMultInx {X (s) }s∈[t] .                               (29)
                                                                                 b
To see this, suppose first that the t input copies are not all identical. Then, there exist s ∈ [t−1] and
j ∈ [R] such that Ds,j = 0 and consequently Fb (X) = 0, which is consistent with the evaluation of
IterMultInx on inconsistent copies. Now, suppose that all copies are identical i.e., X (s) = X (1) , ∀s ∈
[t]. The first factor in Fb (X) (Eq. (28)), which is nothing but E(X), is then 1. Moreover, there is
also a unique computation history τ ⋆ for which Constτ ∗ (X (1) ) = 1, as observed earlier. We then
have:
                                                                         (1) (1)    (1)
                        ^                        ^
                            Cτ (s) ,b (X (s) ) =   Cτ (s) ,b (X (1) ) = zL (wL−1 , iL−1 )b ,
                      s∈[t]                s∈[t]

where the second equality follows from the fact that all the input copies are equal (indeed, they
are all X (1) ), and the final equality follows as in Eq. (16) in the proof of Theorem 3.6. This proves
the claimed identity of Eq. (29).
     We now describe a quantum circuit to compute Fb (X). We first introduce a circuit to evaluate
Ds,j (X) and hence the expression in Eq. (27). We will describe U1 that has the following action on


                                                    33
the inputs {X (s) }s∈[t] along with (t − 1)R many ancilla qubits initialized as |0⟩:
                                                                                   
                                                                
                                               U1
                                                                       O O
                     ⊗s∈[t] |X (s) ⟩ |0⟩(t−1)R −→   ⊗s∈[t] |X (s) ⟩         |Ds,j ⟩                                         (30)
                                                                                               s∈[t−1] j∈[R]

For this, we will re-use the circuit introduced in the proof of Claim 3.4 for checking equality of
different copies of indices. Let us denote the (t − 1)R ancilla qubits as {os,j }s∈[t−1],j∈[R] . We
                                                                                                                        (s)
first apply a layer of (t − 1)R CNOTs in parallel with a CNOT gate from each |Xb ⟩ to os,j for
                                                                                       (s)
all s ∈ [t − 1], j ∈ [R]. This has the effect of setting the state of os,j to that of Xj . We
                                                                                                                      (s+1)
then apply another layer of CNOTs in parallel with a CNOT gate from each Xj                   to os,j for
                                                                               (s)    (s+1)
all s ∈ [t − 1], j ∈ [R]. At this point, the state of each qubit os,j is |Xj ⊕ Xj           ⟩. Applying
                                                                                     (s)       (s+1)
a single-qubit X gate on each os,j then sets of the state to be the indicator [Xj = Xj               ] i.e.,
             (s)    (s+1)
|os,j ⟩ = |[Xj = Xj       ]⟩ = |Ds,j (X)⟩ , ∀s ∈ [t − 1], j ∈ [R]. At this point, we could measure all
the qubits over {os,j } in the computational basis and apply an AND gate over the measurement
outcomes to obtain the value of E(X) (Eq. (27)). However, we will postpone this step until after
                            (1)  (1) (1)
describing how to obtain zL (wL−1 , iL−1 ) in the case E(X) = 1.
     For a fixed s ∈ [t] and hence a fixed τ (s) ∈ T , we now describe a circuit to compute Cτ (s) ,b (X)
for all b ∈ [log NL−1 ] (Eq. (25)). Define |Y (s) ⟩ as a portion of the copy of the input X (s) assigned
                                       (s)        (s) (s) (s)            (s)
to the computation history τ (s) = (r1 , . . . , rL , a0 , a1 , . . . , aL−1 ):
                              (s)   (s)   (s)      (s)     (s)     (s)         (s)      (s)    (s)        (s)   (s)   (s)
      Y (s) := (w(s) , z0 , z1 (a0 ), z2 (r1 , a1 ), . . . , zℓ (rℓ , aℓ ), . . . , zL−1 (rL−2 , aL−2 )).                     (31)
                                                                         (s)    (s)      (s)
Once τ (s) is fixed, all the addresses involved in zℓ+1 (rℓ , aℓ ) for all ℓ ∈ [L − 2] are fixed. We can
then use the circuit Uτ from the proof of Theorem 3.6, denoted here as Uτ (s) , to clarify which copy
                                                                                         (s) (s)   (s)
of the input we work with, and which has the following action inputs of |Y (s) ⟩, |zL (rL−1 , aL−1 )⟩
along with 2 log NL−1 ancilla qubits:
                          ⊗ logN            (s)    (s)       (s)         ⊗ logN
               |Y (s) ⟩ |0⟩         L−1   |zL (rL−1 , aL−1 )⟩ |0⟩                 L−1

       U (s)                                      ⊗ logN           (s) (s)    (s)
                                                                                                                      
      −−τ−→ |Y (s) ⟩ |Constτ (s) (X (s) )⟩                 L−1
                                                                 |zL (rL−1 , aL−1 )⟩ ⊗b∈[log NL−1 ] |Cτ (s) ,b (X (s) ⟩ .     (32)

     Applying the circuits Uτ s in parallel for all s ∈ [t] (and hence all τ (s) ∈ T ) would then simply
produce:
                                                                              
                                               (s) (s)     (s)
               ⊗s∈[t] |Y (s) ⟩ |0⟩⊗ log NL−1 |zL (rL−1 , aL−1 )⟩ |0⟩⊗ log NL−1
 ⊗s∈[t] Uτ (s)       h                            ⊗ log NL−1 (s) (s)      (s)
                                                                                                                   i
−−−−−−    −→ ⊗s∈[t] |Y (s) ⟩ |Constτ (s) (X (s) )⟩           |zL (rL−1 , aL−1 )⟩ ⊗b∈[log NL−1 ] |Cτ (s) ,b (X (s) )⟩ .

Denote the overall circuit as U := (⊗s∈[t] Uτ (s) )U1 , which then has the following action:
                    
      ⊗s∈[t] |X (s) ⟩ |0⟩(t−1)R |0⟩2 log NL−1
                                            
                                                                    ⊗ log NL−1
                                                                                                                 
  U
                          O     O
 −→ ⊗s∈[t] |X (s) ⟩                  |Ds,j ⟩ |Constτ (s) (X (s) )⟩             ⊗b∈[log NL−1 ] |Cτ (s) ,b (X (s) )⟩ ,
                               s∈[t−1] j∈[R]
                                                                                                                              (33)


                                                                         34
                                          (s)   (s)   (s)
where we have noted that |Y (s) ⟩, |zL (rL−1 , aL−1 ⟩ are a part of the input |X (s) ⟩, and collected
all the ancilla qubits required for U1 and Uτ (s) in the first line. For a specified b ∈ [log NL−1 ],
measuring the qubits which hold the state |Ds,j ⟩ , ∀s ∈ [t − 1], j ∈ [R] and |Cτ (s) ,b ⟩ , ∀s ∈ [t] in the
computational basis and then applying the AND logical gate over the outcomes then gives us the
desired result of Eq. (29).15
    We can now once again analyze the qubit count, depth, and gate complexity of U . For each
s ∈ [t], the total number of input qubits involved in defining |X (s) ⟩ is:
                                     L−1          L−1                  L−1
                                                            !                     !
                                     X            X                    X
                    R = O log N0 +       log nℓ +     log Nℓ = O            log Nℓ ,
                                          ℓ=1           ℓ=0                   ℓ=0

where we have used the fact that the size of the input and output to zℓ require ⌈log Nℓ−1 ⌉ bits each
                                                                    L−ℓ−1           L
to specify. Using the fact that Nℓ = m · ℓj=1 nj , nℓ (T, L) = K 4·8      , m = K 8 and that L is
                                          Q
assumed to be a constant, we then have that:

                                       R = O L23L log K .
                                                          

Taking into account the size of t and our choices for the parameters, the total number of qubits
used is:
                                                     L
                                         tR = K O(L8 ) .
The contribution to the gate complexity of U is due to U1 , which has gate complexity O(tR) =
      L
K O(L8 ) , and Uτ (s) for all s ∈ [t], each requiring:
                                          L−1
                                                    !
                                          X
                                      O       log Nℓ = O(L23L log K)
                                          ℓ=0

one- and two-qubit gates (from the proof of Theorem 3.6). Overall, the gate complexity of U is
therefore:                                                         
                                            L               L
                       O(tL23L log K + K L8 ) = O L23L K L8 log K .
Since all the Us ’s are applied in parallel, the depth of U before application of the AND gate is same
as depth of any particular Us , which is O (L + log L + log log K), in addition to the depth of U1
which is O(1). Overall, the depth of U is therefore:

                                          O (L + log L + log log K) .

This places IterMultInx in ∧ ◦ QNC0 [log log K], and completes the proof.

3.4     Classical lower bound
3.4.1    Communication problem and token count
We use the autoregressive model used in [CPW25] to show unconditional lower bounds on trans-
former architectures, but adapt it to apply to the IterMultInx function. Our autoregressive model
consists of L + 2 macro-players, who are indexed −1, 0, 1, . . . , L. The protocol takes place over L
communication epochs, which are inherently directional. For each index i, macro-player i receives
as input the concatenation of t sub-player copies. In particular:
  15
    Alternately, if given a β ∈ [NL−1 ], we can also output [β = IterMultInx(X)] by adding β on log NL−1 ancilla
qubits, measuring these in the computational basis and performing a classical AND gate on these along with all the
measurement outcomes for each b ∈ [log NL−1 ] from before.


                                                       35
  1. the input of macro-player −1 is (w(1) , . . . , w(t) ) ∈ A−1
                                                               t ;

                                            (1)          (t)
  2. the input of macro-player 0 is (z0 , . . . , z0 ) ∈ A0t ;
                                                               (1)     (t)
  3. for ℓ ∈ [L], the input of macro-player ℓ is (zℓ , . . . , zℓ ) ∈ Aℓt .
At the end of the protocol, i.e., at the end of epoch L, macro-player −1 must output the value of
IterMultInx on the given instance.

Token counts. We now estimate the total number of tokens taken up by each player in the
communication protocol. For this, it will be helpful to use the parameters as counted in the
                                                                               (i)
original protocol used in [CPW25], which used the iterated index problem. Let morig denote the
token count of player i in the original iterated index problem, i.e.:
                                             (
                                      (i)      Ni−1 i ∈ [L],
                                    morig =
                                               1      i ∈ {−1, 0}.
In our problem, i.e., the iterated multi-index problem, on the other hand, macro-player i holds t
                                                                                 (i)         (i)
concatenated copies of the same set of tokens. So now, his token count becomes mnew := t · morig ,
which means the total input length (i.e., number of tokens) becomes:
                                                   L
                                                   X
                                  n(T, L) :=             m(i)
                                                          new = t · norig (T, L),                  (34)
                                                  i=−1
                        PL     (i)
where norig (T, L) :=    i=−1 morig is the total (token) length of the original iterated index instance.
     Now, recall that the autoregressive communication model relies on a bandwidth parameter
B ∈ N (which relates it to the width of the transformer in Lemma 2.4). By definition, no response
that player i receives from player j can exceed the bandwidth bit-count. Specifically, we must have,
for each ℓ ∈ [L], and any pair of players i and j:
                                                   (ℓ)
                                                  Πj,i ≤ 2B · m(i) .                               (35)

As we stated earlier, for the protocol to succeed, at the end of epoch L, player −1 must output a
                               (L)
value that depends only on X−1 . We are now ready to prove our lower bound, after a couple of
lemmas we state first.

Lemma 3.8. The copy complexity t = t(T, L), as defined in Section 3.2.2, satisfies the follow-
ing bound:
                                                               O(L)
                     t ≤ CL · T cL , where cL = 2O(L) , CL = 22     .
In particular, for every constant L, we have that t is a fixed polynomial in T .

Proof. We first bound each Nℓ in terms of K. By definition, Nℓ = m · ℓj=1 nj , so the exponent of
                                                                        Q
K in Nℓ is:
                                     L−1
                                     X          Xℓ
                                          j+1
                                         8    +     4 · 8L−j−1 .
                                          j=0             j=1

Observe that this is a sum of two geometric series, each with ratio 8. Clearly, both sums are 2O(L) ,
                                   O(L)
and so, for all ℓ, we have Nℓ = K 2     . Therefore, we have:
                                  L−1        O(L) L        O(L)      O(L)
                                  Y
                             t=         Nℓ = K 2      = K L·2     = K2      .
                                  ℓ=0


                                                           36
Substituting K = (T L)8 , we obtain:
                                             2O(L)               O(L)        O(L)
                             t = (T L)8                 = T 8·2          · L8·2        = CL · T cL ,
                                     O(L)
where we have set CL := L8·2     and cL := 8 · 2O(L) and absorbed all other implicit constants
independent of L into them appropriately. Note that both CL and cL only depend on L.

3.4.2    Transformer lower bound
Lemma 3.9. Fix T ≥ 1. Suppose that there is a deterministic autoregressive protocol Πmulti that
solves IterMultInx on bandwidth T in L epochs for every instance. Then, there is a deterministic
autoregressive protocol Πorig that solves IterInx on bandwidth T ′ := T t in L epochs for every instance.

Proof. Consider an arbitrary instance (w, z0 , z1 , . . . , zL ) of IterInx, where the tuple is distributed
across players −1, 0, 1, . . . , L in the usual way (i.e., player i holds the i-th component of the vec-
tor). Now, we can have the players in the protocol
                                                         Πorig simulate Πmulti on the diagonal instance
                 (s)          (s)                 (s)
 {w(s) }s∈[t] , {z0 }s∈[t] , {z1 }s∈[t] , . . . , {zL }s∈[t] of IterMultInx:

                                                            (s)                    (s)
                                    w(s) := w,            z0 := z0 ,              zℓ     := zℓ

for all s ∈ [t], ℓ ∈ [L]. Concretely:
   1. For all i ∈ {−1, 0, 1, . . . , L}, player i locally constructs the t-fold concatenation of its input,
      and treats the resulting string as the input to macro-player i in Πmulti . Note that this is
      purely local; no communication between players is needed.
   2. The players now run Πmulti verbatim, acting as the macro-players in that protocol. In par-
                                   (ℓ)              (ℓ)
      ticular, whenever a message Γi,j or response Πj,i is sent in Πmulti between the macro-players,
      the same bits are passed in Πorig between the same players.
   3. At the end of epoch L, player −1 in Πorig outputs the output of macro-player −1 in Πmulti .
     Note that the resulting protocol is correct: on the diagonal instance the consistency predicate
E = 1 (i.e., all the xs given to individual players are the same), and so the output of Πmulti equals
IterInx(w, z0 , z1 , . . . , zL ), as required. Let us examine the bandwidth used by Πorig . Suppose player
                    (i)                                                              (i)        (i)
i in Πorig has morig tokens; he locally concatenates t copies of this, creating mnew = t · morig tokens,
and therefore each of his communicated strings is blown up by a factor of t. By the bandwidth
constraint of the autoregressive model applied to Πmulti , we have:
                                            (ℓ)                                        (i)
                                       Πj,i ≤ 2T · m(i)
                                                    new = 2(T t) · morig ,


which is precisely within the bandwidth-(T t) budget of Πorig . The number of epochs remains
unchanged at L.

     We are now ready to state and prove the lower bound. The instance family is parameterized
by the transformer’s bandwidth itself: the parameters K, m, {nℓ }, {Nℓ }, t, n are defined exactly
as above (as functions of T = Hdp and L). This is the standard parameterization of [CPW25],
in which the hard instance is tailored to the candidate model size. To prove the theorem, we
first observe that on top of the parameters involved in T -parameterized IterMultInx, our quantum
upper bound also had an extra parameter β ∈ [Nℓ−1 ] specified in the problem and the goal was
to check if β equals the output of the T -parameterized IterMultInx. Since we prove lower bounds

                                                              37
against determiistic transformer models (for which we showed the ∧ ◦ QNC0 [log log n] upper bound.
However, note that checking this equality amounts to computing the output of T -parameterized
IterMultInx, and hence below we prove lower bounds on transformers computing this function.16

Theorem 3.10. Let L ≥ 2 be constant. Let T be any L-layer decoder-only transformer (with H
heads, embedding dimension d, and precision p, with width T := Hdp) which solves every instance
of the T -parameterized IterMultInx family. Then, the width T of T satisfies:
                                                                −O(L)
                                                T ≥ n(T, L)2             ,

where n(T, L) is the number of tokens (i.e., context length) needed to specify the instance family.

Proof. Since T solves the T -parameterized IterMultInx family on every instance, by Lemma 2.4,
there is an L-epoch autoregressive protocol Πmulti of bandwidth T solving the same task.17 By
Lemma 3.9 (applied with bandwidth T and copy parameter t), there is an L-epoch autoregressive
protocol Πorig of bandwidth T t solving IterInx on the same parameter T . Applying Theorem 3.5 to
Πorig , we get:
                                  T t ≥ nαorig
                                           L
                                               , where αL = 2−O(L) .                         (36)
                                                                         O(L)
By Lemma 3.8, t = CL T cL with cL = 2O(L) , and CL = 22                         . Substituting into (36), we get:

                                                CL · T cL +1 ≥ nαorig
                                                                  L
                                                                                                                    (37)

By definition of n and Eq. (34), we have n = t · norig = CL T cL · norig . Hence, we get:
                                                               n
                                                  norig ≥            .
                                                            C L T cL
Substituting this into (37) yields:
                                       αL
                                                  n αL                            n αL
                            
              cL +1    1         n                                 cL +1+cL αL
            T       ≥     ·                =                  =⇒ T             ≥        .
                      CL      C L T cL       CL1+αL · T cL αL                    CL1+αL

The exponent on the left-hand side is cL (1 + αL ) + 1 ≤ 2cL + 1 = 2O(L) (since αL ≤ 1). For
constant L, CL1+αL is a constant independent of n. Taking roots and absorbing the constant into
the asymptotic, we get:
                                                             −O(L)
                                 T ≥ nαL /(cL +1+cL αL ) = n2      .
Since T = Hdp by definition, the claimed bound is immediate.

3.5    Obstructions in further improvement
In this section, we show that if a function f is deterministically computable by QNC0 circuit of
depth log log n (given an advice state) and followed by an AND gate, then this f is already in
AC0 . Note that AC0 functions roughly capture constant-precision transformers (which are quite
weak from an expressivity point of view); indeed, we wish to have lower bounds against at least
log-precision transformers. However, since our main result already says that an O(log log n)-depth
   16
      Concretely, we remark that when reducing the transformer lower bound to the communication lower bound, we
will provide this β parameter to the L + 2-th player, who needs to check if β equals the output of T -parameterized
IterMultInx which depends on parameters defined for the previous L − 1 players.
   17
      Actually, Lemma 2.4 is about IterInx rather than IterMultInx, but we can adapt the same result for IterMultInx as
well with no change in the proof.


                                                          38
QNC0 circuit with a single AND gate computes functions outside of such log-precision transformers,
this shows that even increasing the depth of our (log log n)-circuit by a constant multiple has an
effect on its computational power. This implies that our separation is essentially optimal.18 Indeed,
if we increase the depth from log log n to c · log log n for some constant c > 1, then we break past
AC0 to a function that is hard for transformers, i.e., needs width nΩ(1) .

Theorem 3.11. Let n ≥ 1 and d ≤ log log n+O(1). Every function f : {0, 1}n → {0, 1} computable
by ∧ ◦ QNC0 [d]/qpoly can be computed in AC0 .

Proof. Let U be the depth-d QNC0 circuit, let |ψn ⟩ be the advice state, and let the input state be
|x⟩|0⟩|ψn ⟩. Let q1 , . . . , qm be the designated output qubits, where m = poly(n). For each j, let Qj
denote the projector onto the event that output qubit qj is measured as 1, and define:

                                                   Pj := U † Qj U.

The projectors Pj commute, since the corresponding output measurements commute. The final
AND gate accepts with probability:
                                                         m
                                                         Y
                                           ⟨x, 0, ψn |         Pj |x, 0, ψn ⟩ .
                                                         j=1

Because
     Q the computation is exact, this acceptance probability is either 0 or 1, and it equals fn (x).
Since j Pj is a projector, the acceptance probability is 1 if and only if:
                                          m
                                          Y
                                                Pj |x, 0, ψn ⟩ = |x, 0, ψn ⟩.
                                          j=1

For commuting projectors, this is equivalent to:

                             Pj |x, 0, ψn ⟩ = |x, 0, ψn ⟩  for every j ∈ [m].

Thus fn (x) = 1 if and only if m
                                  V
                                     j=1 gj (x) = 1. The light cone of the output qubit qj contains at
most 2d input qubits, since the circuit has bounded fan-in and depth d. Hence Pj acts nontrivially
only on those at most 2d input qubits, together with some ancilla and advice qubits. The ancilla
and advice states are fixed independently of x. Therefore the truth value of gj (x) depends only on
the input bits in this light cone. Thus each gj is a Boolean function of at most 2d input bits. Since
any Boolean function on k bits can be written as a DNF of size at most k2k , applying this fact with
                                                                              d
k ≤ 2d yields the fact that each gj has a depth-2 AC0 circuit of size 2O(2 ) . Taking the AND over
                                                                                d
all m = poly(n) such circuits gives an AC0 circuit for fn of size poly(n, 22 ). So, if d ≤ log log n,
then fn ∈ AC0 , as desired.


4     Distributional separation: quantum circuits versus DLMs
In this section, we begin by describing our candidate problem for the distributional separation, and
then prove our upper and lower bounds, with the latter being the bulk of the technical content.
  18
     As we mentioned in the introduction, our result crucially uses that f is exactly computed by ∧ ◦ QNC0 /qpoly. If
f was only approximated by these circuits, then such a result is unclear.




                                                           39
4.1    Main result
Candidate problem. We first define our candidate problem. For B ∈ N, consider the set of
length-B strings which have even parity, and define the uniform distribution on this set as follows:

                                     UB⊕ := unif{x ∈ {0, 1}B : |x|= 0}.

For n = M B, define the block-parity distribution:
                                                         M
                                                         O
                                               Dblk :=         UB⊕ ,
                                                         b=1

i.e., Dblk is uniform on the set of strings {x1 , . . . , xM } ⊆ {0, 1}B such that i∈[B] xji = 0 for all
                                                                                  L
j ∈ [M ]. Our proof will require us to keep careful track of these parameters, and we will use the
following settings:

                                B = n0.01 ,      M = n0.99 ,           s, R = n0.9 ,                        (38)

where s is the number of CoT/workspace tokens, and R is the total number of output-token
revision/remasking events. Note that by this definition, Dblk is defined on n bits and all the other
parameters such as CoT, remasking, revision will be o(n). These parameter choices will become
clear when discussing our lower bounds.19 With these definitions we prove our main result.

Theorem 4.1. The distribution Dblk satisfies the following:
   1. Dblk can be sampled exactly by a QNC0 circuit.
   2. No constant-round shallow DLM(GC0 , log n) with s = n0.9 CoT tokens and R = n0.9 output-
      token remasking/revision events can sample Dblk within constant total variation distance.

    We now make a few remarks about our candidate problem and the lower bound. The DLM
samplers we consider have no input; on any (vacuous) input, their goal is just to produce an output
that is a uniform sample from the distribution Dblk . The DLM that we consider here is the same
one described in Section 1, wherein each token generated within the same round is generated in a
conditionally independent manner, given the current full transcript. The constraints on this DLM
are as follows:
  (i) We allow only s = n0.9 hidden transcript bits.
 (ii) The output schedule may be fully adaptive and may depend on hidden token values.
(iii) For each transcript cell τ , the corresponding token is computed by a polynomial-size GC0 (k)
      circuit with depth O(1), where k = O(log n) (i.e., consists of GCk gates for k = O(log n)).

4.2    Quantum upper bound
We first show that the block-parity distribution is easy for shallow quantum circuits. The key
ingredient is the poor man’s cat state construction of Watts-Kothari-Schaeffer-Tal [BWKST19],
which can be prepared in QNC0 .
  19
     We remark that one could have also chosen B, M such that B · M = n and s, R = o(M ), so we could have also
handled s, R = n1−ε for arbitrarily small constant ε. We chose the parameters above for the sake of simplicity in
presentation.



                                                       40
Lemma 4.2. For every B, the distribution UB⊕ can be sampled exactly by a QNC0 circuit. Conse-
quently, Dblk can be sampled exactly by a QNC0 circuit.

Proof. We first describe how to prepare the poor man’s cat state in QNC0 . P          We start with B qubits
initialized to |0⟩⊗B . Applying Hadamard to all qubits gives |+⟩⊗B = √1 B x∈{0,1}B |x⟩. Next, we
                                                                                   2
measure the commuting parity observables Zi Zi+1 , for i = 1, . . . , B − 1.20 Let the measurement
outcomes be si ∈ {0, 1}, where si = 0 corresponds to eigenvalue +1 (i.e., xi ⊕ xi+1 = 0), and si = 1
corresponds to eigenvalue −1 (i.e., xi ⊕ xi+1 = 1). These B − 1 parity constraints determine the
string uniquely up to its bitwise complement. More precisely, there is some string z ∈ {0, 1}B ,
such that z and z̄ are the only two solutions to all constraints (in fact, they would be of the form
z1 = 0, z2 = s1 , z3 = s1 +s2 , . . . and z1 = 1, z2 = 1+s1 , z3 = 1+s1 +s2 , . . . where all the additions are
modulo 2). Therefore, after applying these B − 1 projective measurements, the post-measurement
state is:
                                                     |z⟩ + |z̄⟩
                                                         √      ,                                         (39)
                                                           2
which is referred to as the poor man’s cat state. The value of z depends on the measurement
outcomes (s1 , . . . , sB−1 ), but this will not matter for the sampling task. Now, finally, we apply
Hadamard to all B qubits, and measure in the computational basis. For any outcome y ∈ {0, 1}B ,
the amplitude equals:                                   
                                           ⊗B |z⟩ + |z̄⟩
                                    y Had        √          ∝ (−1)y·z + (−1)y·z̄ .
                                                   2
Since y · z̄ = y · z + B
                        P
                          i=1 yi (mod 2), we obtain:
                                                                            
                                 (−1)y·z + (−1)y·z̄ = (−1)y·z 1 + (−1)|y| .

Therefore, the amplitude vanishes whenever |y| is odd, and has equal magnitude for every even-
parity string y. Hence, the measurement outcome is distributed exactly as y ∼ UB⊕ .
      Let us quickly describe the corresponding quantum circuit. Consider the input of |+⟩B on the B
system qubits, which we will denote by qi . Let us add B −1 many ancilla qubits, which we denote by
ai , ∀i ∈ [B − 1], each initialized to |0⟩. To carry out the measurement corresponding to Zi Zi+1 , ∀i ∈
[B − 1], we will first apply a layer of CNOTs with control over qi to the target ai for all i ∈ [B − 1]
followed by another layer of CNOTs with control over qi+1 to the target ai for all i ∈ [B−1]. At this
point, the state over the system and ancilla qubits is √1 B x |x⟩ ⊗i∈[B−1] |xi ⊕ xi+1 ⟩ . Measuring
                                                              P
                                                           2
the qubits ai , ∀i ∈ [B − 1] in the computational basis then results in the post-measurement state
of Eq. (39) over qubits qi , ∀i ∈ [B]. Finally, applying Hadamards to the qubits {qi } and then
measuring all qi in the computational basis yields outcomes y ∼ UB⊕ as shown above. This circuit
is illustrated in Figure 6. We observe that the poor man’s cat state (Eq. (39)) can be prepared in
depth 4, and overall this gives an exact QNC0 sampler for UB⊕ . Running this sampler independently
and in parallel on all M blocks gives an exact QNC0 sampler for Dblk , proving the lemma statement.
The overall circuit has depth 4, gate complexity O(BM ), and is over O(M B) qubits.

4.3    Lower bound: important lemmas
For the lower bound, we will use as a black box the following theorem of Kumar [Kum23], that
shows that GC0 [log m] circuits cannot approximate the parity function with constant bias, extend-
  20
    By this we mean, apply the two-qubit operator Πsi = |00⟩⟨00|+|11⟩⟨11| and Π1+si = |01⟩⟨01|+|10⟩⟨10| onto
qubits i, i + 1.


                                                      41
                            q1 : |0⟩   H     •              H                  y1

                           a1 : |0⟩                                            s1

                            q2 : |0⟩   H     •   •          H                  y2

                           a2 : |0⟩                                            s2

                            q3 : |0⟩   H     •   •          H                  y3

                           a3 : |0⟩                                            s3

                            q4 : |0⟩   H     •   •          H                  y4

                           a4 : |0⟩                                            s4

                            q5 : |0⟩   H         •          H                  y5


  Figure 6: Illustration of circuit for preparing the poor man’s cat state and sampling from U5⊕ .


ing the well-known result of Hastad [Hås14] that AC0 functions cannot approximate parity with
constant bias.

Theorem 4.3 ([Kum23]). If C: {0, 1}m → {0, 1} is a polynomial-size constant depth GC0 [log m]
circuit, then:
                                                  1
                   Pr [C(x) = x1 ⊕ · · · ⊕ xm ] ≤ + 2−Ω(m/poly log(m)) .
                 x∼{0,1}m                         2

4.3.1    DLM run as a combination of distributions
We now show the core structural fact underlying the lower bound. Recall that, by the model
definition, a DLM follows a sequence of denoising steps before the n output tokens (which we will
view as M blocks of B bits) need to produce a string distributed according to Dblk . Consider a
DLM round t, and consider the parity blocks that are completed for the first time in this round. For
such a block b ∈ [M ], let rb denote the number of coordinates in block b that are newly generated in
the t-th round; equivalently, rb is the number of block-b coordinates that were still masked in each
of the first t − 1 rounds. Now, observe that since Dblk is uniform on every block b ∈ [M ], the newly
generated coordinates in the completion round should closely emulate the uniform distribution over
an affine parity coset. In particular, the target conditional law for the block b is the distribution:21
                                             n             rb
                                                           M         o
                                 Uarbb := unif          rb
                                              x ∈ {0, 1} :    xi = ab ,
                                                                i=1

where ab ∈ {0, 1} is set according to the parity value of the previously revealed coordinates of the
block in the first t − 1 rounds. Now, suppose there are q ≤ M such blocks completed in the t-th
  21                                                              P
   Throughout this section, we interchangeably use ⊕xi and |x|=       i xi but emphasize that we using the latter, the
summation is modulo 2.




                                                     42
round. Then, the overall target conditional law is the product distribution:
                                                       q
                                                       O
                                                 V =         Uarbb .                                          (40)
                                                       b=1

In other words, V is a product distribution across the simultaneously completed blocks, but each
of the factors Uarbb contains P
                              an internal parity constraint among the coordinates of that block (de-
termined by ab ). Let D := qb=1 (rb − 1) be the total dimension of the parity-coset distribution V .
Consequently, we have:
                                                   q
                                                   Y
                                      |supp(V )|=     2rb −1 = 2D .
                                                       b=1
             Pq
Let N :=       b=1 rb denote the total number of generated coordinates. The following theorem
precisely quantifies the obstruction created by these “inter-block” constraints; roughly speaking,
even though the q blocks in V are independent of one another, a distribution with many parity-
constrained factors cannot be approximated by a small mixture of fully coordinate-wise product
distributions.22

Theorem 4.4. Let q ≤ M ∈ N be the number of blocks completed in the t-th round. For rb ≥
2, ab ∈ {0, 1}, define:
                             Uarbb = unif{x ∈ {0, 1}rb : |x|= ab (mod 2)}.
Define V be as in Eq. (40), N = qb=1 rb , and D = N − q. Suppose W is a distribution on {0, 1}N
                                    P
with supp(W ) ⊆ supp(V ) and H(W ) ≥ D − κ for some κ ≥ 0.23 Then, thereP       exists a constant η > 0
such that whenever P is a mixture of K product distributions (i.e., P = K        h=1 λh Qh for product
distributions Qh ) satisfying TV(P, W ) ≤ η, then there exist constants c1 , c2 satisfying:

                                            log K ≥ c1 D − κ − c2 .

Proof. Let Πb denote the set of fresh coordinates of block b revealed in the current round, so
|Πb |= rb . In Eq. (40), the b-th tensor factor Uarbb is indexed by these coordinates, after choosing an
arbitrary ordering of Πb . Thus, identifying {0, 1}rb with {0, 1}Πb , we have:
                                                                    
                                           M                                    [q
                                         Π
                supp(V ) = x ∈ {0, 1} :          xi = ab for every b ,       Π :=     Πb .
                                                                    
                                               i∈Πb                                       b=1


Then V is uniform on S, and |S|= b 2rb −1 = 2D (since each linear constraint on x ∈ {0, 1}rb
                                      Q
is satisfied by exactly half the variables). Since V is supported on S, we have V (S) = 1 and
V (S c ) = 0. Since supp(W ) ⊆ S, we also have W (S) = 1 and W (S c ) = 0. Therefore, we have:

                                P (S c ) = |P (S c ) − W (S c )|≤ TV(P, W ) ≤ η.                              (41)

Next, since P and W are distributions on {0, 1}N , Lemma 2.2 implies:

                        |H(P ) − H(W )|≤ η · log(2N − 1) + h2 (η) < ηN + h2 (η),
  22
     Although this does not seem a priori related to DLMs as stated, every round of a DLM in fact generates product
distributions, which is the connection that we will utilize later.
  23
     Note that the choice W = V corresponds to κ = 0.




                                                        43
where h2 (·) denotes the binary entropy function. Therefore, we have:

    H(P ) ≥ H(W ) − O(ηN ) − O(1) ≥ D − κ − O(ηN ) − O(1) ≥ (1 − c1 η)D − κ − O(1),              (42)

where the second inequality uses the fact that H(W ) ≥ D − κ (an equality whenP W =V   P, since V is
                            D
uniform on a set S of size 2 ), and the last inequality uses the fact that N = b rb ≤ 2 b (rb −1) =
2D. On the other hand, we can sample from P by first choosing h ∈ [K] and then sampling Qh ;
therefore, we have:

                                    H(P ) ≤ log K + Eh H(Qh ).                                   (43)

Let αh := Qh (S c ), so that αh is the probability thatPthe product distribution Qh violates at least
one of the parity constraints defining S. Since P = K    h=1 λh Qh , we have:
                                                  X
                                   η ≥ P (S c ) =   λh αh = Eh [αh ],                            (44)
                                                 h

where the first inequality used Eq. (41). Hence Eh [αh ] ≤ η. Fix parameters τ = 10−3 and
η = 1/20(c1 + 2 · 103 ), where c1 is the constant that appears in Eq. (42). We now split the mixture
components into “good” and “bad” components according to whether αh ≤ τ or αh ≥ τ .

Bad components.         By Markov’s inequality on Eq. (44), first observe that:

                                   Pr[αh > τ ] ≤ Eh [αh ]/τ ≤ η/τ.
                                    h

So, the total weight over all possible h on the bad components is at most η/τ . Now every distribution
on {0, 1}N has entropy at most N . Hence, the entropy contributed by each of the bad components
to the overall average entropy Eh [H(Qh )] is at most (η/τ ) · N ≤ 2η/τ · D (where we have used the
fact that N ≤ 2D, established earlier).

Good components.          It remains to bound the entropyQ  of the good components, namely, those
               c
satisfying Q(S ) ≤ τ. Fix such a product distribution Q = i Qi , and for each block b, let εb denote
the probability that Q violates the parity constraint in block b. Equivalently:
                                                            
                                                  M
                                    1 − εb = Q      xi = ab  .
                                                   i∈Πb


Since Q is a product across the coordinates, and the blocks Πb are disjoint, this implies the parity
events across different blocks are actually independent. Therefore, we have:
                                                 Y
                                         Q(S) =    (1 − εb ).
                                                     b

Since Q(S c ) ≤ τ , we have Q(S) ≥ 1 − τ , i.e., b (1 − εb ) ≥ 1 − τ . Again, by taking logarithms and
                                               Q
using the identity − log(1 − u) ≥ u for u ∈ [0, 1), we get that:
                                    X
                                        εb ≤ − log(1 − τ ) ≤ 2τ,
                                        b




                                                   44
using the fact that τ is a sufficiently small constant (e.g., our choice of 10−3 ). We now analyze a
single block Πb . Write pi := Qi (1), and ti := min{pi , 1 − pi }. Recall that for independent Bernoulli
variables, Xi ∼ Bernoulli(pi ), we have:
                                                                           
                              M                1                 Y
                         Pr      Xi = ab  = 1 + (−1)ab           (1 − 2pi ) .
                                               2
                               i∈Πb                                       i∈Πb

which follows from the fact that:
                          h              i   Y              Y
                                ⊕i∈Πb Xi
                        E (−1)             =   E[(−1)Xi ] =   (1 − 2pi ).
                                                    i∈Πb                    i∈Πb

Since the left hand side is precisely 1 − εb , we have that
                                           Y                      X
                                1 − εb =       (1 − 2ti ) ≥ 1 − 2   ti ,
                                                i∈Πb                        i∈Πb
                                             Q              P
where the second inequality uses the identity i (1−ai ) ≥ 1− i ai for ai ∈ [0, 1]. Taking logarithms
on both sides and using the identity − log(1 − u) ≥ u for u ∈ [0, 1) again as before, we obtain
                                            X
                                               ti ≤ Cεb
                                                   i∈Πb

for some absolute constant C provided εb ≤ 1/10. Hence, the entropy of the block equals:
X                XX                    XX                    XX                 e     X        erb
     H(QΠb ) =            h2 (pi ) =            h2 (ti ) ≤             ti log      ≤C   εb log     ≤ C·τ log eN/τ,
                                                                                ti             εb
 b               b i∈Πb                b i∈Πb                 b i∈Πb                   b

using h2 (u) = h2 (1 − u) (by definition of binaryPentropy), and also the concavity of the map
u 7→ u log(e/u), and then finally the fact that    b eb ≤ τ . Therefore, every good component
satisfies H(Qh ) ≤ Cτ log eN
                           τ .
     Combining the good and bad components, we obtain:

                                   Eh [H(Qh )] ≤ Cτ log(eN /τ ) + 2ηD/τ.

Finally, using Eq. (43) and Eq. (42), we get:

                                                                                               eN  2η
        (1 − cη)D − κ − O(1) ≤ H(P ) ≤ log K + Eh [H(Qh )] ≤ log K + Cτ log                       + D,
                                                                                                τ  τ
which lets us conclude that:

                      log K ≥ (1 − c1 η − 2η/τ ) D − κ − Cτ log(eN /τ ) − O(1)                                (45)
                               ≥ (1 − c1 η − 2η/τ ) D − κ − Cτ log(2eD/τ ) − O(1)                             (46)
                               ≥ c3 D − κ − c4 ,                                                              (47)

using the fact that η and τ were chosen to be constants, c3 and c4 are new constants, and D is
sufficiently large. The theorem follows by relabeling the constants c3 , c4 as c1 , c2 respectively.




                                                             45
4.3.2      DLMs for Dblk induce high entropy distributions
Notation.        We first define some necessary and convenient notation. Let η := TV(PY , Dblk ).
       • PY is the output distribution of the DLM: the law of the final n-bit string, ignoring the
         workspace. By assumption, TV(PY , Dblk ) ≤ η.
       • P is the distribution of the entire run: every revealed token (workspace and output), in order.
       • Let Db = Dblk (· | A) for A = supp(PY ), i.e., the induced distribution of Dblk conditioned on
         the bits in A having been revealed by PY already.
       • Let Y denote the final output string of the DLM. Define a distribution Q over executions24
         by first sampling y ∼ D,
                                b then sampling an execution from the original law P conditioned
         on Y = y:
                                                X
                                       Q(·) :=      D(y)
                                                    b    P(· | Y = y).                         (48)
                                                    y


Furthermore, suppose the final n coordinates of the DLM run were a and the remaining tokens were
y (i.e., including the revealed output coordinates and their assignments). Then, we have:

                         P(output=a,rest=y) = PY (a) · P(rest = y|output = a)                              (49)
                         Q(output=a,rest=y) = D(a)
                                              b    · P(rest = y|output = a)                                (50)

by the definitions above. Observe that Q ≤ P.25 We work under the reweighted law Q rather than
with P directly, specifically in order to make the target constraints exact. Namely, Q preserves the
DLM’s conditional execution law given the final output, while replacing the output marginal by D, b
so that each completed block has the exact parity structure of Dblk .
    An execution E = (V1 , . . . , Vt ) is the ordered record of token values revealed during the run
(workspace and output). Since the schedule is a deterministic function of the current state, the
positions of these values are determined by the values themselves, and so E determines the run
completely. Furthermore, we define the history of the run to be Ft := (V1 , . . . , Vt−1 ) as the DLM
configuration at the start of round t. Throughout this section, we define a realizable history F
as one wherein Q(Ft = F ) > 0. Given Ft = F (note that F will often be suppressed when it is
unambiguous from the context), we define the following:
   1. We write Πt (F ) ⊆ [n] for the output coordinates revealed in round t; sometimes we also
      write Πbt to denote the output coordinates of block b revealed in round t; furthermore, define
      rb := |Πbt |.
   2. We write Ct (F ) for the blocks completed in round t (i.e., coordinates revealed during round
      t that had not been revealed at the end of round t − 1).
   3. Let ct := |Ct (F )| be the number of blocks b completed during round t.
   4. We write Ot ∈ {0, 1}Πt (F ) for the vector of output bits generated on these coordinates in
      round t. Thus, Ot consists of the output components of the entire round record Vt .
   5. We write ab (F ) ∈ {0, 1} for the parity of its values revealed already; and define:
                   n                 M                                 o
           SF := z ∈ {0, 1}Πt :          zi = ab (F ) for every b ∈ Ct ,      log|SF |= |Πt |−ct .
                                       i∈Πb
  24
    We remark that this distribution is not physically motivated but will be useful for our calculations.
  25
    By this we mean every event of P-probability zero also has Q-probability zero: Q never produces a trajectory
the DLM could not.


                                                        46
In the basic model (Steps 1–3) every output coordinate is revealed exactly once (we will discuss
the remasking/revision later, in Section 4.4.3).

Entropy counting in DLMs. The following observation is the basic entropy accounting behind
the proof. Fix a round t and condition on a realized history F before this round. Then, the schedule
fixes the set Πt (F ) of output coordinates generated before round t (since it was deterministic by
definition). Thus, the only remaining randomness in this round is the vector Ot ∈ {0, 1}Πt (F ) of
newly generated output bits during round t. Now consider a block b that is completed in this round,
e.g., b ∈ Ct (F ). All coordinates of block b outside Πbt (F ) have already been revealed in the history
F . Since the output marginal of Q is D   b (by Eq. (48)), and D  b is supported on valid Dblk outputs,
the final block must satisfy the corresponding parity constraint. Therefore, the newly generated
bits in Πbt (F ) cannot be arbitrary: they must satisfy an affine parity constraint determined by the
bits of block b already present in F .
    For each completed block b ∈ Ct (F ), the parity condition in block b imposes one affine constraint
on the newly generated coordinates Πbt (F ):
                                      M                M
                                             Yt,i =           yi ,
                                          i∈Πbt (F )        i∈Bb \Πbt (F )

where the right-hand side is fixed by the history F . Since distinct blocks involve disjoint sets of
coordinates, these constraints are independent. Thus, the possible values of Ot are contained in an
affine subspace:
                                         SF ⊆ {0, 1}Πt (F )
of codimension ct (F ) = |Ct (F )|, and therefore:

                                              |SF |= 2|Πt (F )|−ct (F ) .

It follows that since Ot ∈ SF , we have:

                               HQ (Ot | Ft = F ) ≤ log|SF |= |Πt (F )|−ct (F ),

where HQ (Ot | Ft = F ) denotes the Shannon entropy of the newly revealed coordinates in round t
under the conditional distribution Q( · | Ft = F ). We therefore define the entropy deficit in round
t on history F as:

                               δt (F ) := (|Πt (F )|−ct (F )) − HQ (Ot | Ft = F ).                 (51)

The preceding discussion shows that δt (F ) ≥ 0. Intuitively, δt (F ) measures exactly how much
entropy the actual conditional law of the newly generated bits loses beyond the entropy loss forced
by the parity constraints of the blocks completed in this round. We now formally state a lemma
about this entropy deficit. We use calligraphic letters for random objects and plain lowercase letters
for their realizations. For notational convenience, we use Ft to denote the random history before
round t, while F denotes a fixed realized value of this history. Similarly, E is the random execution,
while e is a realized execution.

Lemma 4.5. Suppose that TV(PY , Dblk ) ≤ η ≤ 1/2. Then, we have:
(a) TV(P, Q) ≤ 2η;
      T
      X
(b)         EQ [δt (Ft )] ≤ s + 2η.
      t=1


                                                         47
Proof. (a) Since A = supp(PY ), we have PY (Ac ) = 0, and therefore:

                        α := Dblk (Ac ) = |Dblk (Ac ) − PY (Ac )| ≤ TV(PY , Dblk ) ≤ η.

Next, D(y)
      b    = Dblk (y)/(1 − α) for y ∈ A and D(y)
                                            b    = 0 otherwise, so:
                        1X          1     1X           1h          α     i
        TV(D,
           b Dblk ) =      Dblk (y)     −1 +   Dblk (y) = (1 − α) ·     + α = α.
                        2           1−α      2           2          1−α
                          y∈A                                 y ∈A
                                                                /


We now claim that, in fact, TV(P, Q) = TV(PY , D). b Every execution e with P(e) > 0 satisfies
Y (e) ∈ A, and for each such e, we may factorize as follows:

               P(e) = PY (Y (e)) · P(e | Y = Y (e)),                  b (e)) · P(e | Y = Y (e)),
                                                               Q(e) = D(Y

i.e., the two laws share the same conditional distribution of the execution given the output, and
differ only in the distribution of the output itself. Noting that both laws vanish on executions with
Y (e) ∈/ A, we can now grouping executions according to their output:
                            X                    X                      X
             2 TV(P, Q) =       |P(e) − Q(e)| =       |PY (y) − D(y)|
                                                                b            P(e | Y = y)
                                e                       y∈A                     e: Y (e)=y
                                                        X
                                                    =         |PY (y) − D(y)|
                                                                        b
                                                        y∈A

                                                    = 2 TV(PY , D),
                                                                b
        P
using       e:Y (e)=y P(e | Y = y) = 1 for each y ∈ A. By the triangle inequality, we now get:

                                     b ≤ TV(PY , Dblk ) + TV(Dblk , D)
                  TV(P, Q) = TV(PY , D)                             b ≤ η + α ≤ 2η.

(b) Recall that an execution is the tuple E = (V1 , . . . , VT ), where Vt records all values generated in
round t. Since the execution is specified by the round records (V1 , . . . , VT ), applying the chain rule
gives us:
                                              T
                                              X                    XT
                      HQ (V1 , . . . , VT ) =   HQ (Vt | V<t ) =      HQ (Vt | Ft ),
                                              t=1                         t=1

since the pre-round history Ft is precisely the transcript determined by V<t .
     We first lower bound this entropy. Suppose the final output of the DLM after T rounds is Y ,
which is a deterministic function of the execution E. By the definition of the reweighted execution
distribution Q, if E ∼ Q, then Y follows distribution D.
                                                      b Since the final output Y is a deterministic
function of the execution, the full execution must contain at least as much randomness as Y
does. Indeed, under Q, the output distribution is D, b and since entropy cannot increase under a
deterministic function, we get:

                                    HQ (V1 , . . . , VT ) ≥ HQ (Y ) = H(D).
                                                                        b                            (52)

Writing α := Dblk (Ac ), every atom of D
                                       b = Dblk (· | A) has mass:

                                               Dblk (y)   2          −(n−M )
                                        D(y)
                                        b    =          ≤       .
                                               1−α          1−α


                                                         48
Thus, we get our desired lower bound:

                   b ≥ (n − M ) − log              1                    1
                 H(D)                                 ≥ (n − M ) − log     ≥ (n − M ) − 2η,                                 (53)
                                                  1−α                  1−η
where we used α ≤ η ≤ 1/2.
    We now upper bound the entropy. Fix a round t and a realizable history F . The scheduling
rule fixes the coordinates revealed in this round. Let Wt be the workspace part of Vt , and let Ot
be the output part, supported on the coordinate set Πt (F ). If wt (F ) workspace coordinates are
generated in this round, then we have:

                                             HQ (Wt | Ft = F ) ≤ wt (F ).

On the other hand, by the definition of the round-t deficit (Eq. 51), we also have:

                                 HQ (Ot | Ft = F ) = |Πt (F )|−ct (F ) − δt (F ).

By subadditivity, we have:

          HQ (Vt | Ft = F ) = HQ ((Wt , Ot ) | Ft = F ) ≤ wt (F ) + |Πt (F )|−ct (F ) − δt (F ).

Taking expectations and summing over the rounds, the chain rule gives us:
                                                                   T
                                                                   X
                                      HQ (V1 , . . . , VT ) =            HQ (Vt | Ft ).
                                                                   t=1

For a fixed history F , the round-t record consists of the workspace update, using at most wt (F )
bits of entropy, together with the newly revealed output values Ot . Hence:

                                HQ (Vt | Ft = F ) ≤ wt (F ) + HQ (Ot | Ft = F ).

By the definition of the round deficit, summing Eq. (51) over the rounds, we therefore have:
                                           T
                                           X                     T
                                                                 X                                 T
                                                                                                   X
              HQ (V1 , . . . , VT ) ≤ EQ         wt (Ft ) + EQ           (|Πt (Ft )|−ct (Ft )) −         EQ δt (Ft ).
                                           t=1                   t=1                               t=1

On the other hand, by Eq. (52), we have:

                                                 HQ (V1 , . . . , VT ) ≥ H(D).
                                                                           b

Combining the two displays and using the lower bound on H(D)
                                                          b gives us:

                                     T
                                     X                         XT
                                           EQ [δt (Ft )] ≤ EQ [   wt (Ft )] + 2η.
                                     t=1                           t=1
                                                                                                             PT
Finally, since the workspace has at most |Σ|s = 2s possible states, we also have EQ                             t=1 wt (Ft ) ≤ s,
and hence:
                                     XT
                                          EQ [δt (Ft )] ≤ s + 2η,
                                                 t=1
as claimed.

                                                              49
     Overall, the lemma above gives us a global upper bound of s on the entropy deficit. The next
goal is to show a similar statement for some individual block as well, which we wish to eventually
use to embed our hard parity function computation. To this end, for a block b, define the quantity
def b to measure how much entropy block b loses over the whole run, beyond the one bit of entropy
that must be lost when the block is completed because of its parity constraint. Using the lemma
above, we will show that the extra entropy loss beyond the unavoidable parity constraints is small
on average across blocks; this will be used later to show the existence of a block on which the DLM
performed a last-bit parity computation.

Corollary 4.6. Fix b ∈ [M ]. For a round t and a realized pre-round history F , let nb,t (F ) denote
the number of block-b output coordinates revealed in round t, let Ytb denote their values, and define:

                 db,t (F ) :=        nb,t (F ) − 1[b ∈ Ct (F )]             − HQ (Ytb | Ft = F ) ≥ 0.
                                     |           {z           }               |       {z       }
                                entropy block b is entitled to this round         entropy it delivers

Writing:
                                                          T
                                                          X
                                               def b :=         EQ [db,t (Ft )]
                                                          t=1
                                                                    PM
for the total deficit of block b over the run, we have                 b=1 def b ≤ s + 2η.

Proof. Fix a round t and a history F = Ft . We first prove nonnegativity. If b ∈  / Ct (F ), then the
newly revealed coordinates of block b in round t form an nb,t (F )-bit string. Hence:

                                             HQ (Otb | Ft = F ) ≤ nb,t (F ),

and so, db,t (F ) ≥ 0 by definition. On the other hand, if b ∈ Ct (F ), then round t completes block
b. The previously revealed coordinates of block b are already fixed by the history F , and the final
block must satisfy its parity constraint. Thus:

                                           HQ (Otb | Ft = F ) ≤ nb,t (F ) − 1,

and therefore db,t (F ) ≥ 1, with equality whenever the newly revealed coordinates are uniformly
distributed over the corresponding affine parity coset. For fixed F , we have:
                           X
                               (nb,t (F ) − 1[b ∈ Ct (F )]) = |Πt (F )|−ct (F ).
                                 b

Additionally, since Ot is the collection of the blockwise strings (Otb )b , subadditivity yields:
X                                  X
   db,t (F ) = |Πt (F )|−ct (F ) −   HQ (Otb | Ft = F ) ≤ |Πt (F )|−ct (F ) − HQ (Ot | Ft = F ) = δt (F ).
 b                                     b

Taking expectations over F = Ft , summing over t, and applying Lemma 4.5 gives us:

                       X               T
                                       X           X                  T
                                                                      X
                             def b =          EQ       db,t (Ft ) ≤         EQ δt (Ft ) ≤ s + 2η.
                         b             t=1         b                  t=1

This concludes the proof.



                                                            50
4.4     Proof of the classical lower bound
4.4.1    Step 1: Setting up the basic model.
In this section, our goal is to prove the following lemma:

Lemma 4.7. We have:
                                EP [#{b : rb ≥ 2}] ≤ O(s) + O(ηM ).

Proof. We first work under Q. Fix a round t and an output-and-schedule transcript τ . Let:
                (2)
                                                                   X
              Bt (τ ) := {b ∈ Ct (τ ) : |Πbt (τ )|≥ 2}, Dt (τ ) :=   (|Πbt (τ )|−1).
                                                                         (2)
                                                                      b∈Bt (τ )

For a transcript τ , let µτ denote the conditional law under Q of the newly revealed coordinates in the
multi-bit completed blocks, namely b∈B(2) (τ ) Πbt (τ ). Let ντ denote the corresponding conditional
                                        S
                                             t
law under P on the same coordinates. We call τ good if:

                                             TV(µτ , ντ ) ≤ η0 ,

and bad otherwise. Let Badt be the event that the round-t transcript is not good.
    Under P, conditioned on τ and on a workspace state w, the round-t denoising law is a
coordinate-wise product. Averaging over the possible workspace states, ντ is therefore a mixture of
at most K ≤ |Σ|s product distributions. On every good transcript τ , this mixture is η0 -close to µτ ,
which is supported on a product of affine parity cosets of total dimension Dt (τ ) and has entropy
H(µτ ) which can be written as:
                                      H(µτ ) = Dt (τ ) − δt ,
where δt is the total entropy deficit in round t. By Theorem 4.4, we have:

                                     log K ≥ c3 Dt (τ ) − δt − C0 .

Since log K ≤ s, every good transcript therefore satisfies:
                                                    s + δ t + C0
                                        Dt (τ ) ≤                .                                (54)
                                                         c3
By Lemma 2.1 and Lemma 4.5(a), the average value of TV(µτ , ντ ) over the round-t transcript τ is
at most 4η. Hence Markov’s inequality gives us:
                                                                       4η
                               Pr[Badt ] = Pr [TV(µτ , ντ ) > η0 ] ≤      .
                                Q             Q                        η0
The key observation is that for the final counting bound, we only need the number of multi-bit
                                                                    (2)
completions in round t, not their total dimension. Let Nt (τ ) := |Bt (τ )|. Now, on a good transcript,
we have Nt (τ ) ≤ Dt (τ ), and hence, by Eq. (54):
                                                    s + δ t + C0
                                        Nt (τ ) ≤                .
                                                         c3
On a bad transcript, we can use the trivial bound Nt (τ ) ≤ M . Since PrQ [Badt ] ≤ 4η/η0 , we obtain:

                                             s + C0 EQ [δt ] 4η
                                EQ [Nt ] ≤         +        +    · M.
                                               c3    c3       η0

                                                     51
Summing over the constant number of rounds and using Lemma 4.5(b) yields:
                              T                              T
                              X                s + C0   1 X             4T η
                         EQ         Nt ≤ T ·          +     EQ [δτt ] +      ·M
                                                 c3     c3               η0
                              t=1                           t=1
                                           s + C0 s + 2η 4T η
                                       ≤T·       +      +     · M.
                                             c3     c3    η0
                                                                                P
Finally, observe that every block with rb ≥ 2 is counted exactly once in          t Nt :   in its completion
round. Therefore, |{b : rb ≥ 2}|= Tt=1 Nt , and hence:
                                  P

                                                     s + C0 s + 2η 4T η
                         EQ [|{b : rb ≥ 2}|] ≤ T ·         +      +     · M.
                                                       c3     c3    η0
Since |{b : rb ≥ 2}|∈ [0, M ] and TV(P, Q) ≤ 2η, we obtain:

                             EP [|{b : rb ≥ 2}|] ≤ EQ [|{b : rb ≥ 2}|] + 2ηM,

which proves the claim (using the fact that |Σ|= 2 as assumed in our DLM definition).

4.4.2    Step 2: Final-bit prediction yields parity computation.
Selecting a block. For a block b, let Eb := {x ∈ {0, 1}B : B
                                                             L
                                                               i=1 xi = 0}. If rb = 1, let Jb be the
final revealed coordinate and Gb the bit generated there. Define:
                                                        M
                                Sb := {rb = 1 and Gb =      Xb,i }.
                                                                  i̸=Jb

Let Pb be the marginal distribution of the final output on block b. Since TV(PY , Dblk ) ≤ η, data
processing under the projection to block b yields:

                                               TV(Pb , UB⊕ ) ≤ η.

In particular, since UB⊕ is supported on Eb , we have Pr[Xb ∈/ Eb ] ≤ η. If rb = 1 and the final parity
of block b is correct, then the unique bit generated in the completion round must equal the parity
of the other B − 1 bits. Thus, there are only two ways for Sb to fail: either b was not completed in
the last-bit regime, or the final block has odd parity. Therefore, we get:
                                                           B
                                                           M
                                      Sbc ⊆ {rb ≥ 2} ∪ {         Xb,i = 1},
                                                           i=1

and hence:
                                          Pr[Sbc ] ≤ Pr[rb ≥ 2] + η.
By Lemma 4.7, we have:
                  1 X              E[#{b : rb ≥ 2}]     s      √      1
                      Pr[rb ≥ 2] =                  ≤O       + O( η) ≤     ,
                  M                      M              M              100
                    b∈[M ]

say, for η bounded below by some constant depending only on T and n (recall that s = n0.9 = o(M )).
Hence, with ∆ := s + 2η, we have:
          1 X             1       1                         1 X         ∆
              Pr[Sbc ] ≤     +η ≤    ,                          def b ≤         (Corollary 4.6).
          M              100      40                        M           M
              b                                                    b


                                                      52
Hence it follows that at most M/4 blocks have Pr[Sbc ] > 1/10, and at most M/4 blocks have
def b > 4∆/M ; hence there exists b⋆ satisfying:
                                           9                                 4∆
                              Pr[Sb⋆ ] ≥           and          def b⋆ ≤        .
                              P            10                                M
This b⋆ behaves essentially like an almost-ideal last-bit block. With high probability, the DLM leaves
one coordinate until the end and fills it in as a function of the parity of all the other coordinates.
Furthermore, the def b⋆ bound says that those earlier coordinates still have nearly full entropy, so
this can be viewed as a parity-prediction task on nearly random bits.

Replacing the pre-completion bits by uniform bits. The block b⋆ almost always behaves
like a last-bit parity block. The only remaining issue is that the first B − 1 bits of this block
were generated by the DLM itself, whereas the parity lower bound is stated for uniform external
inputs. To address this, we compare the original execution law P with a modified execution law B:
whenever an output coordinate of block b⋆ is revealed before the completion round of b⋆ , its value
is replaced by an independent uniform bit. All other tokens, and in particular the one during the
completion round of b⋆ , are generated exactly as in the original DLM. The bound for b⋆ implies that
this replacement does not change the execution law by much, which we formalize in the following
lemma.

Lemma 4.8. For the block b⋆ chosen above, we have:
                                                                 p
                                Pr[Sb⋆ ] ≥ Pr[Sb⋆ ] − 6T η −      T · def b⋆ .
                                  B        P

Proof. For a round t and a realizable history F , define:

                           et (F ) := TV(P(Vt | Ft = F ), B(Vt | Ft = F )) .

We compare the two executions round-by-round. As long as the two executions have the same
history Ft = F (upto round t − 1), the probability of a disagreement in round t is exactly et (F ). In-
deed, if the two executions never disagree, then the event Sb⋆ has the same value in both executions.
Hence:
                                                          T
                                                          X
                                  Pr[Sb⋆ ] ≥ Pr[Sb⋆ ] −         EP [et (Ft )].                     (55)
                                      B        P
                                                          t=1

For the given t and F , the two conditional round laws agree unless some output coordinate of block
b⋆ is revealed during some round t, that occurs before the completion round of b⋆ . Therefore, if
                          ⋆
either b⋆ ∈ Ct (F ) or Πbt (F ) = ∅, then et (F ) = 0. Otherwise, conditioned on F , it must be the case
        ⋆
that Otb is independent of all other tokens generated in round t. Conditioned on Ft = F , observe
                                                                                  ⋆
that within each round the DLM has a product structure implies that Otb is independent of the
                                                                                  ⋆
other tokens generated in round t. Since B changes only the marginal of Otb , tensorization of total
variation gives us:
                                                                       b⋆
                                              ⋆
                                                                               
                            et (F ) = TV P(Otb | Ft = F ), Unif({0, 1}Πt (F ) ) .
Now, define:
                           βt (F ) := TV(P(Ot | Ft = F ), Q(Ot | Ft = F )) .
By data processing, we get:
                                 ⋆                 ⋆
                                                               
                          TV P(Otb | Ft = F ), Q(Otb | Ft = F ) ≤ βt (F ).

                                                   53
Moreover, in the non-completing case b⋆ ∈
                                        / Ct (F ), the blockwise deficit is precisely:
                                                  ⋆                 ⋆
                                  db⋆ ,t (F ) = |Πbt (F )|−HQ (Otb | Ft = F ).

Applying Pinsker’s inequality now gives us:
                                                      b⋆
                              ⋆
                                                               q
                     TV Q(Otb | Ft = F ), Unif({0, 1}Πt (F ) ) ≤ db⋆ ,t (F ).

Therefore, for all F , we have:
                                                           q             
                                   et (F ) ≤ βt (F ) + min   db ,t (F ), 1 .
                                                               ⋆




We now take expectations in the bound on et (F ). For the first summand on the right hand
side, the conditional-TV lemma implies that EP [βt (Ft )] ≤ 4η. For the second summand, since
     √
min{ x, 1} ∈ [0, 1] and TV(P, Q) ≤ 2η, changing the measure from P to Q costs at most 2η; then,
Jensen’s inequality gives:                       q
                                    EP [et (Ft )] ≤ 6η +       EQ [db⋆ ,t (Ft )].
Summing this quantity over t, and applying Cauchy-Schwarz now gives:
                                                          v
  T
  X                        T q
                           X
                                                          u T
                                                          u X                           p
    EP [et (Ft )] ≤ 6T η +     EQ [db⋆ ,t (Ft )] ≤ 6T η + tT  EQ [db⋆ ,t (Ft )] = 6T η + T · def b⋆ .
  t=1                       t=1                                         t=1

Finally, combining this with Eq. (55) yields:
                                                                    p
                                   Pr[Sb⋆ ] ≥ Pr[Sb⋆ ] − 6T η −      T · def b⋆ .
                                   B          P

This concludes the proof.

Lemma 4.9. There is a randomized polynomial-size constant depth GC0 [log n] circuit C such that:

                                    Pr    [C(x) = |x|      (mod 2)] ≥ Pr[Sb⋆ ].
                              x∼{0,1}B                                        B

Proof. The circuit that is being constructed in the lemma is obtained via the process B, using
its input x = (x1 , . . . , xB ) as the uniform bits inserted into block b⋆ before completion. All other
randomness comes from the hard-wired coin flips baked into the circuit, and all scheduling and
denoising steps are implemented by the given DLM circuits. If b⋆ is completed by a single final
coordinate J, and the generated final bit is G, the circuit outputs G ⊕ xJ ; otherwise it outputs an
arbitrary bit. On the event Sb⋆ , we have:
                                                       M
                                                 G=       xi ,
                                                        i̸=J


and hence, G⊕xJ = B
                     L
                        i=1 xi . Therefore, C computes parity with probability at least PrB [Sb⋆ ]. Now,
by the DLM definition, observe that the circuit that computes G is via a constant-depth GC0 [log n]
circuit. Since n = B 100 , its size is polynomial in B, and its gate arity is O(log n) = O(log B).




                                                        54
Putting everything together.          By Lemma 4.8 and our choice of b⋆ , we have:
                                                                       r
                                              p             9                 4∆
                  Pr[Sb⋆ ] ≥ Pr[Sb⋆ ] − 6T η − T · def b⋆ ≥    − 6T η − T ·      .
                  B          P                              10                M

Now,
q      recall our parameters, wherein we chose ∆ = O(s) = O(n0.9 ) and M = n0.99 . Therefore,
   T · 4∆
       M = o(1) for constant T . Taking η ≤ ε⋆ (T ) to be sufficiently small, the right-hand side
becomes at least 4/5 for all sufficiently large n. Then, Lemma 4.9 gives us a randomized polynomial-
size depth-Od,T (1) GC0 [log B] circuit that computes B-bit parity with success probability at least
4/5. Fixing the internal coins gives a deterministic circuit with the same success probability,
contradicting Theorem 4.3. This proves the lower bound in the basic model.

4.4.3   Step 3. Allowing revision and remasking
We now explain how the our argument extends to DLMs that allow a (bounded) number of re-
masking or revision operations. Suppose the DLM allows for at most R = n0.9 output-token
remasking/revision events during the entire execution, and suppose each such operation acts on a
single output coordinate. We say a block b ∈ [M ] is touched if some output coordinate in block b is
ever remasked or revised over the course of the computation. Let Touchb denote this event. Since
each remasking/revision event touches only one output coordinate, we have the pathwise bound:
                                        M
                                        X
                                              1[Touchb ] ≤ R.
                                        b=1

Thus, the fraction of touched blocks is at most R, which by assumption satisfies R/M = o(1). We
will simply discard all touched blocks (since there are not too many of them). We remark that it
is important to discard these blocks, because revision/remasking events destroy the monotonicity
property that is used crucially in the proof for the basic model above: if any coordinate is later
revised or remasked, then the value written at the first completion time need not be its final value
(note that in our structural result, we used the fact that once a token is unmasked it is never
masked or revised again).
    For untouched blocks, however, monotonicity is completely preserved. Once an output coor-
dinate in an untouched block is written, it is never subsequently changed or remasked. Hence,
when such a block is first completed, the coordinates unmasked in that round are final output
coordinates, and so the same residual affine parity constraint as in the basic model applies. Let:

                 Ntunt := #{b : ¬Touchb , b is completed in round t with rb ≥ 2}.

For every realization of the DLM execution, after deleting all touched blocks, the remaining com-
pleted blocks evolve exactly as in the monotone model (i.e., the model where there is no remask-
ing/revision). Applying Lemma 4.7 to this induced monotone execution therefore gives

                                   EQ [Ntunt ] ≤ O(s) + O(ηM ),

where we used that the total number of DLM rounds is a constant. Indeed, Lemma 4.7 applies to
the induced monotone execution on the untouched blocks, so on good transcripts the same product-
mixture argument bounds the corresponding dimension, while on bad transcripts we again use the



                                                  55
trivial bound Ntunt ≤ M .26 Summing over the constant number of rounds, we get:

                              EQ [#{b : ¬Touchb , rb ≥ 2}] ≤ O(s) + O(ηM ).

Adding back touched blocks costs at most R pathwise, and therefore:

                                    EQ [#{b : rb ≥ 2}] ≤ O(s) + O(ηM ) + R.

Next, define the last-bit success event with the extra requirement that the block is untouched:
                                                                    
                                                             M      
                            Sbrev := ¬Touchb , rb = 1, Gb =      Xb,i .
                                                                    
                                                                      i̸=Jb

If Sbrev fails, then either block b was touched, or it was completed by at least two coordinates, or
its final parity is incorrect. Thus:
                                                             ( B         )
                                                              M
                             (Sbrev )c ⊆ Touchb ∪ {rb ≥ 2} ∪     Xb,i = 1 .
                                                                    i=1

Averaging over b gives us:
                              M
                          1 X                  R   E[#{b : rb ≥ 2}]
                              Pr[(Sbrev )c ] ≤   +                  + η = o(1)
                          M                    M         M
                              b=1

nearly uniform pre-completion bits. Namely, Corollary 4.6 gives us:
                                                  M
                                             1 X         s + 2η
                                                 def b ≤        .
                                             M             M
                                                  b=1

Combining this with the preceding bound and applying Markov’s inequality, it follows that there
exists a block b⋆ such that:
                                             9                            4(s + 2η)
                               Pr[Sbrev
                                     ⋆ ] ≥              and    def b⋆ ≤             .
                                             10                              M
In the event Sbrev              ⋆
                 ⋆ , the block b is never remasked or revised, and it is completed in the last-bit regime.

Therefore the replacement-by-uniform-bits argument applies to this block exactly as in the basic
model. The modified simulation now simulates the full DLM, including any revision/remasking op-
erations on other blocks, while using external uniform input bits for the pre-completion coordinates
of block b⋆ . If the DLM ever touches block b⋆ , the simulation may fail, but this is already accounted
for in the complement of Sbrev ⋆ . Thus, the same parity-prediction reduction goes through with an ad-

ditional additive loss of at most R/M = o(1), which vanishes. Consequently, our tolerated amount
of remasking/revision does not affect the constant-distance lower bound.27
  26
     We remark that the property that a block is untouched is determined only after the full execution of the DLM,
so one should not interpret the argument as saying that conditioned on a future event, the DLM execution induces a
product distribution. Rather, the proof is more naturally viewed as deleting the touched blocks after the execution
and applying the same counting argument to the induced monotone execution on the remaining blocks. Making this
viewpoint completely formal requires only routine bookkeeping, without affecting any of the quantitative bounds;
overall producing the same bounds as we show below as long as s, R = o(n).
  27
     We emphasize that [CPW25] accounts for revision/remasking as the number of rounds where these revisions
occur; we offer a significantly more fine-grained measure, wherein each token which undergoes revision/remasking is
included in the complexity.


                                                          56
References
[ADOY25]     Anurag Anshu, Yangjing Dong, Fengning Ou, and Penghui Yao. On the computa-
             tional power of QAC0 with barely superlinear ancillae. In Proceedings of the 57th
             Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, pages 1476–1487. Association for
             Computing Machinery, 2025. 5
[BEG26]      Jinge Bao and Francisco Escudero-Gutiérrez. Learning junta distributions, quantum
             junta states, and QAC0 circuits. In Proceedings of the 43rd International Conference
             on Machine Learning, Proceedings of Machine Learning Research. PMLR, 2026. To
             appear. 5
[BGK18]      Sergey Bravyi, David Gosset, and Robert König. Quantum advantage with shallow
             circuits. Science, 362(6412):308–311, 2018. 2, 4, 7, 8
[BGKT20]     Sergey Bravyi, David Gosset, Robert König, and Marco Tomamichel. Quantum
             advantage with noisy shallow circuits. Nature Physics, 16(10):1040–1045, 2020. 2
[BWKST19] Adam Bene Watts, Robin Kothari, Luke Schaeffer, and Avishay Tal. Exponential
          separation between shallow quantum circuits and unbounded fan-in shallow classical
          circuits. In Proceedings of the 51st Annual ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory of
          Computing, pages 515–526. Association for Computing Machinery, 2019. 2, 4, 7, 8,
          40
[BWP26]      Adam Bene Watts and Natalie Parham. Unconditional quantum advantage for sam-
             pling with shallow circuits. In Shubhangi Saraf, editor, 17th Innovations in Theoret-
             ical Computer Science Conference (ITCS 2026), volume 362 of Leibniz International
             Proceedings in Informatics (LIPIcs), pages 17:1–17:12. Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-
             Zentrum für Informatik, 2026. 2, 7
[CC22]       David Chiang and Peter Cholak. Overcoming a theoretical limitation of self-attention.
             In Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
             guistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 7654–7664. Association for Computational
             Linguistics, May 2022. 4
[CCP23]      David Chiang, Peter Cholak, and Anand Pillay. Tighter bounds on the expressivity
             of transformer encoders. In Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on
             Machine Learning, volume 202 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pages
             5544–5562. PMLR, 2023. 4
[CPW25]      Lijie Chen, Binghui Peng, and Hongxun Wu. Theoretical limitations of multi-layer
             transformer. In 2025 IEEE 66th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer
             Science (FOCS), pages 2631–2653. IEEE, 2025. 3, 4, 5, 6, 12, 15, 17, 18, 26, 27, 35,
             36, 37, 56
[CSV21]      Matthew Coudron, Jalex Stark, and Thomas Vidick. Trading locality for time: Certi-
             fiable randomness from low-depth circuits. Communications in Mathematical Physics,
             382(1):49–86, 2021. 2
[CT91]       Thomas M. Cover and Joy A. Thomas. Elements of Information Theory. John
             Wiley & Sons, New York, 1991. Chapter 2, “Entropy, Relative Entropy and Mutual
             Information,” pp. 12–49. 12
[ENO+ 21]    Nelson Elhage, Neel Nanda, Catherine Olsson, Tom Henighan, Nicholas Joseph, Ben
             Mann, Amanda Askell, Yuntao Bai, Anna Chen, Tom Conerly, Nova DasSarma,


                                               57
            Dawn Drain, Deep Ganguli, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Danny Hernandez, Andy Jones,
            Jackson Kernion, Liane Lovitt, Kamal Ndousse, Dario Amodei, Tom Brown, Jack
            Clark, Jared Kaplan, Sam McCandlish, and Chris Olah. A mathematical framework
            for transformer circuits. Transformer Circuits Thread, December 2021. 3
[FGPT25]    Stephen A. Fenner, Daniel Grier, Daniel Padé, and Thomas Thierauf. Tight bounds
            on depth-2 QAC-circuits computing parity, 2025. 5
[G+ 24]     Gemini Team et al. Gemini 1.5: Unlocking multimodal understanding across millions
            of tokens of context, 2024. 3
[GGJ26a]                                                              / QAC0 iff QAC0 is
            Lucas Gretta, Meghal Gupta, and Malvika Raj Joshi. Parity ∈
            Fourier-concentrated. In 2026 IEEE 67th Annual Symposium on Foundations of
            Computer Science (FOCS). IEEE, 2026. 5
[GGJ26b]    Lucas Gretta, Meghal Gupta, and Malvika Raj Joshi. Super-constant weight Dicke
            states in constant depth without fanout, 2026. 5
[GHMP02]    Frederic Green, Steven Homer, Cristopher Moore, and Christopher Pollett. Counting,
            fanout, and the complexity of quantum ACC. Quantum Information & Computation,
            2(1):35–65, 2002. 5
[GK24]      Sabee Grewal and Vinayak M. Kumar. Improved circuit lower bounds and quantum-
            classical separations, 2024. ECCC: TR24-130. 2, 4, 8, 10, 13
[GKM+ 26]   Daniel Grier, Daniel M. Kane, Jackson Morris, Anthony Ostuni, and Kewen Wu.
            Quantum advantage from sampling shallow circuits: Beyond hardness of marginals.
            In Shubhangi Saraf, editor, 17th Innovations in Theoretical Computer Science Con-
            ference (ITCS 2026), volume 362 of Leibniz International Proceedings in Informatics
            (LIPIcs), pages 73:1–73:14. Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2026.
            2
[GMW26]     Daniel Grier, Jackson Morris, and Kewen Wu. QAC0 contains TC0 (with many copies
            of the input). In 2026 IEEE 67th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer
            Science (FOCS). IEEE, 2026. To appear. 4, 5, 11, 25
[GS20]      Daniel Grier and Luke Schaeffer. Interactive shallow Clifford circuits: Quantum ad-
            vantage against NC1 and beyond. In Proceedings of the 52nd Annual ACM SIGACT
            Symposium on Theory of Computing, pages 875–888. Association for Computing Ma-
            chinery, 2020. 2
[Hås14]    Johan Håstad. On the correlation of parity and small-depth circuits. SIAM Journal
            on Computing, 43(5):1699–1708, 2014. 8, 42
[HJA20]     Jonathan Ho, Ajay N. Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic
            models. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 33, pages
            6840–6851. Curran Associates, Inc., 2020. 2
[JHC26]     Haozhe Jiang, Nika Haghtalab, and Lijie Chen. Diffusion language models are prov-
            ably optimal parallel samplers. In The Fourteenth International Conference on Learn-
            ing Representations, 2026. 3, 7, 18, 21
[JTVW26]    Malvika Raj Joshi, Avishay Tal, Francisca Vasconcelos, and John Wright. Improved
            lower bounds for QAC0 . In Proceedings of the 58th Annual ACM Symposium on
            Theory of Computing, pages 2199–2209. Association for Computing Machinery, 2026.
            5



                                              58
[Kum23]      Vinayak M. Kumar. Tight correlation bounds for circuits between AC0 and TC0 . In
             Amnon Ta-Shma, editor, 38th Computational Complexity Conference (CCC 2023),
             volume 264 of Leibniz International Proceedings in Informatics (LIPIcs), pages 18:1–
             18:40. Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2023. 8, 10, 13, 41, 42
[LG19]       François Le Gall. Average-case quantum advantage with shallow circuits. In Amir
             Shpilka, editor, 34th Computational Complexity Conference (CCC 2019), volume
             137 of Leibniz International Proceedings in Informatics (LIPIcs), pages 21:1–21:20.
             Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2019. 2
[LLZM24]     Zhiyuan Li, Hong Liu, Denny Zhou, and Tengyu Ma. Chain of thought empow-
             ers transformers to solve inherently serial problems. In The Twelfth International
             Conference on Learning Representations, 2024. 4, 17
[LSH+ 25]    David Layden, Ryan Sweke, Vojtěch Havlı́ček, Anirban Chowdhury, and Kirill Nek-
             lyudov. Wavefunction flows: Efficient quantum simulation of continuous flow models,
             2025. 11
[Met24]      Meta AI. Introducing Meta Llama 3: The most capable openly available LLM to
             date. Meta AI Blog, April 2024. 3
[NPVY24]     Shivam Nadimpalli, Natalie Parham, Francisca Vasconcelos, and Henry Yuen. On
             the Pauli spectrum of QAC0 . In Proceedings of the 56th Annual ACM Symposium on
             Theory of Computing, pages 1498–1506. Association for Computing Machinery, 2024.
             5
[NZY+ 25]    Shen Nie, Fengqi Zhu, Zebin You, Xiaolu Zhang, Jingyang Ou, Jun Hu, Jun Zhou,
             Yankai Lin, Ji-Rong Wen, and Chongxuan Li. Large language diffusion models. In
             Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 38, pages 50608–50646.
             Curran Associates, Inc., 2025. 18, 21
[PNP24]      Binghui Peng, Srini Narayanan, and Christos Papadimitriou. On limitations of the
             transformer architecture. In First Conference on Language Modeling, 2024. 5
[Ros21]      Gregory Rosenthal. Bounds on the QAC0 complexity of approximating parity. In
             James R. Lee, editor, 12th Innovations in Theoretical Computer Science Confer-
             ence (ITCS 2021), volume 185 of Leibniz International Proceedings in Informatics
             (LIPIcs), pages 32:1–32:20. Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2021.
             5
[RWC+ 19]    Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, and Ilya
             Sutskever. Language models are unsupervised multitask learners. Technical report,
             OpenAI, 2019. 3
[SDWMG15] Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Eric A. Weiss, Niru Maheswaranathan, and Surya Ganguli.
          Deep unsupervised learning using nonequilibrium thermodynamics. In Francis Bach
          and David Blei, editors, Proceedings of the 32nd International Conference on Machine
          Learning, volume 37 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pages 2256–2265.
          PMLR, 2015. 2
[SHT23]      Clayton Sanford, Daniel J. Hsu, and Matus J. Telgarsky. Representational strengths
             and limitations of transformers. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-
             tems, volume 36, pages 36677–36707. Curran Associates, Inc., 2023. 4, 5, 15
[SZL+ 25]    Yuxuan Song, Zheng Zhang, Cheng Luo, Pengyang Gao, Fan Xia, Hao Luo, Zheng
             Li, Yuehang Yang, Hongli Yu, Xingwei Qu, Yuwei Fu, Jing Su, Ge Zhang, Wenhao


                                               59
            Huang, Mingxuan Wang, Lin Yan, Xiaoying Jia, Jingjing Liu, Wei-Ying Ma, Ya-Qin
            Zhang, Yonghui Wu, and Hao Zhou. Seed diffusion: A large-scale diffusion language
            model with high-speed inference, 2025. 18, 21
[VH25]      Francisca Vasconcelos and Hsin-Yuan Huang. Learning shallow quantum circuits
            with many-qubit gates. In Nika Haghtalab and Ankur Moitra, editors, Proceedings of
            Thirty Eighth Conference on Learning Theory, volume 291 of Proceedings of Machine
            Learning Research, pages 5553–5604. PMLR, 2025. 5
[VSP+ 17]   Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N.
            Gomez, Lukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In Advances
            in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 30, pages 5998–6008. Curran As-
            sociates, Inc., 2017. 2
[WWS+ 22]   Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Brian Ichter, Fei Xia,
            Ed H. Chi, Quoc V. Le, and Denny Zhou. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reason-
            ing in large language models. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
            volume 35, pages 24824–24837. Curran Associates, Inc., 2022. 11
[YCA24]     Andy Yang, David Chiang, and Dana Angluin. Masked hard-attention transform-
            ers recognize exactly the star-free languages. In Advances in Neural Information
            Processing Systems, volume 37, pages 10202–10235. Curran Associates, Inc., 2024. 4




                                             60
